WHOSE RESPONSIBILITY? 3 Hey, look at this...it says that there is a water shortage in our state, and people are falling sick! “...In many villages, people were found to be How drinking unclean water. Streams have dried up, and so have tanks. In the worst-affected areas, villagers the State have been carrying water across great distances.” Government Works Last year, we discussed the fact that government works at three levels – local, state and national – and looked at the work of local government in some detail. In this chapter, we examine the work of the government at the state level. How does this take “People at the district HQ Patalpuram receive water place in a democracy? supply once in three days. The District Hospital here is What is the role of a overflowing with patients – a large number of whom are children with acute diarrhoea...” Member of the Legislative Assembly (MLA) and Ministers? How do people express their views or demand action from government? We look at these questions through the example of health. 24 Social and Political Life CHAPTER That afternoon... Suddenly... On the TV news, they said ten people have died from diarrhoea! Is that My mother said not to have any iced STOP! possible? Can one really die from it? drinks from the market. She gave one of her lectures this morning, “You have to Who knows? Just be responsible for your health, hope I don’t get it! Shirin!” Ha ha! This road is blocked due to the rally. ...and we demand that the What a loud voice he has...he must be They have gheraoed the MLA’s  residence. authorities take immediate action to a leader or something... Really! Why? Has Ha ha – they bring the public health situation he done something? seem more angry under control! Our MLA must take Shh...I saw him on TV about what he the responsibility for this! too. He is a member of hasn’t done! the Opposition! Who is an MLA? In the above section, you have read about some What is happening in Patalpuram ? events in Patalpuram. You may be familiar with some official names such as Collector, Medical Officer, etc. Why is this problem serious? But have you heard of an MLA and the Legislative Assembly? Do you know the MLA of your area? Can What action do you think can be you identify which party she or he belongs to? taken in the above situation and who do you think should take this Members of the Legislative Assembly (MLAs) are action? Discuss. elected by the people. They then become members of the legislative assembly and also form the Chapter 3: How the State Government Works 25 Discuss the following terms with government. In this way we say that the MLAs your teacher–public meeting, represent people. The example below will help us States in India, constituency, understand this better. majority, ruling party and opposition. Every state in India has a Legislative Assembly. Each state is divided into different areas or Can you explain the following constituencies. For example, look at the map below. terms–majority, ruling party, It shows that the state of Himachal Pradesh is divided opposition with reference to your into 68 assembly constituencies. From each state. constituency, the people elect one representative who then becomes a Member of the Legislative Assembly (MLA). You would have noticed that people stand for elections in the name of different parties. These MLAs, therefore, belong to different political parties. How do people who are MLAs become ministers or chief minister? A political party whose MLAs have won more than half the number of constituencies in a state can be said to be in a majority. The political party that has the majority is called the ruling party and all other members are called the opposition. For example, the Legislative Assembly of the state of Himachal Pradesh has 68 MLA constituencies. Jammu and Kashmir The state of  Himachal Pradesh is coloured in purple in the above thumbnail map of India. Using a pencil outline the following on the map given on page 97: (i) the state that you live in; (ii) the state of Himachal Pradesh. Punjab Uttarakhand 26 Social and Political Life Results of the Assembly Elections in Himachal Pradesh in 2017 Political party Number of MLAs elected Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) ............................................................. 44 Indian National Congress (INC) ................................................... 21 Communist Party of India (Marxist) ............................................... 1 Independents (who don’t belong to any party) .......................... 2 Total ................................................................................ 68 For more details, visit http://hpvidhansabha.nic.in Candidates from various political parties won the Construct a table, similar to the 2017 assembly elections and became MLAs. Since one given for Himachal Pradesh, the total number of MLAs in the Legislative Assembly for your state. is 68, a political party would have needed to have more than 34 MLAs in order to gain a majority. The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) with 44 MLAs had the majority and it became the ruling party. All other MLAs became the opposition. In this case, the Indian National The Head of the State is the Governor. Congress (INC) was the major opposition party, since it She/He is appointed by the Central had the largest number of MLAs after the BJP. Among Government to ensure that the State the opposition were other parties, including those who Government works within the rules and had been elected as independent candidates. regulations of the Constitution. Find out the name of Governor of your State. After the elections, the MLAs belonging to the ruling party will elect their leader who will become At times, the ruling party may not the chief minister. In this case, the BJP MLAs chose Shri Jairam Thakur as their leader and he became be a single party but a group of the chief minister. The chief minister then selects parties working together. This is other people as ministers. After the elections, it is called a coalition. Discuss with the Governor of the state who appoints the chief your teacher. minister and other ministers. The chief minister and other ministers have the responsibility of running various government departments or ministries. They have separate offices. A Legislative Assembly is a place where all the MLAs, whether from the ruling party or from the opposition meet to discuss various things. Hence, some MLAs have dual responsibilities: one as an MLA and the other as a minister. We will read about this further. Chapter 3: How the State Government Works 27 A debate in the Legislative Assembly Afreen, Sujata and many other students from their school travelled to the state capital to visit the Legislative Assembly which was housed in an impressive building. The children were excited. After security checks, they were taken upstairs. There was a gallery from where they could see the large hall below. There were rows and rows of desks. This Assembly was going to have a debate on a current problem. During this time, MLAs can express their opinions and ask questions related to the issue or give suggestions about what should be done by the government. Those who wish to, can respond to this. The minister then replies to the questions and tries to assure the Assembly that adequate steps are being taken. The chief minister and other ministers have to take decisions and run the government. We usually hear about them or see them in the news channels or in the papers. However, whatever decisions are being taken have to be approved by the members of the legislative assembly. In a democracy, these members can ask questions, debate an important issue, decide where money should be spent, etc. They have the main authority. MLA 1: In my constituency of Akhandagaon, during the last three weeks, there were 15 deaths because of diarrhoea. I think it is a shame that this government has not been able to check the situation of a simple problem like diarrhoea while proclaiming itself to be a champion of technology. I would call the attention of the minister in charge of health to take immediate measures to control the situation. MLA 2: My question is why are government hospitals in such a bad situation? Why is the government not appointing proper doctors and other medical staff in the district? I would also like to know how the government plans to deal with this situation 28 Social and Political Life which is affecting a large number of people and is also spreading. This is an epidemic. MLA 3: My constituency of Tolpatti too has a serious shortage of water. Women travel up to 3 or 4 kilometres to collect water. How many tankers have been put into service to supply water? How many wells and ponds have been cleaned and disinfected? MLA 4: I think my colleagues are exaggerating the problem. The government has taken steps to control the situation. Water tankers have been put into service. ORS packets are being distributed. The government is doing everything possible to help people. MLA 5: We have very poor facilities in our hospitals. There are hospitals that do not have a doctor and no medical staff has been appointed for the last few years. In another hospital, the doctor has gone on a long leave. This is a shame. I think the situation is going from bad to worse. How are we going to ensure that ORS packets reach all families in the affected areas? Can you identify the MLAs of the ruling party and the opposition in MLA 6: The opposition members are unnecessarily the illustration? Colour the ruling blaming the government. The previous government party in one colour and the did not pay any attention to sanitation. We have now opposition in another. taken up a drive to clear the garbage that has been lying around for years. 1 2 3 4 5 6 29 In the earlier section you have read about a debate in the Legislative Assembly. The members were debating the action taken or not taken by the government. This is because the MLAs are together responsible for the work of the government. In common usage the word ‘government’ refers to government departments and various ministers who What were the main arguments head them. The overall head is the chief minister. put forward by different MLAs More correctly, this is called the executive part of who thought that the government the government. All the MLAs who gather together was not taking the situation in a (assemble) in the legislative assembly are called the serious manner? Legislature. They are the ones who authorise and supervise their work. As we saw in the earlier section, If you were the health minister, it is from among them that the head of the executive, how would you respond to the or the chief minister is formed. above discussion? Do you think the above debate Working of the government would have been useful in some ways? How? Discuss. The Legislative Assembly is not the only place where opinions are expressed about the work of the In the working of the government, government and action is demanded. You will find explain the difference between newspapers, TV channels and other organisations being an MLA and an MLA who is regularly talking about the government. In a also a minister. democracy, there are various ways through which people express their views and also take action. Let us look at one such way. Soon after the discussion in the assembly, there was a press conference organised by the health minister. Large numbers of people from different newspapers were present. The minister and some government officials were also present. The minister explained the steps the government had taken. Reporters asked many questions at this meeting. These discussions were then reported in different newspapers. The following page has one such report. During the next week, the chief minister and the minister for health visited Patalpuram district. They went to visit the families who had lost their relatives and also visited people in the hospitals. The government announced a compensation for these 30 Social and Political Life Patalpuram | Ravi Ahuja intend to supply drinking During the last few weeks, water to every village there have been many through tanker trucks. Write two measures that the deaths in some districts of The chief minister has goverment undertook for controlling diarrhoea? our state. There has been a promised funds for this strong reaction that the work. They also plan to government has not taken start a campaign to inform What is the purpose of a this seriously. The health people about the steps that press conference? How does minister explained today at can be taken to prevent the press conference help you a press conference that his diarrhoea. When a reporter get information on what the goverment is doing? government has asked all asked him as to what steps the collectors and the chief are being taken to see that medical officers to take garbage that has been lying urgent measures. The most around for months is important problem is that quickly collected, the chief of drinking water. The minister said that he would minister said that they look into this. families. The chief minister also said that he thought the problem was not only one of sanitation but also of a lack of clean drinking water. He said that a highlevel enquiry committee will be asked to look into the needs of the district to provide sanitation facilities and would request the minister for Public Works to take care of the needs of proper water supply in the region. As you saw above, the people in power like the chief minister and the minister have to take action. They do so through various departments like the Public Works Department, the Agriculture Department, the Health Department, the Education Department and so on. They also have to answer questions that are asked in the Legislative Assembly and convince people asking the questions that proper steps are being taken. At the same time, newspapers and the media widely discuss the issue and the government has to respond, for example, by holding the press conferences. Chapter 3: How the State Government Works 31 The government can also decide to make new laws for the state regarding sanitation and health facilities. For example, it may make it compulsory for municipal corporations to ensure that there are adequate toilets in every urban area. It may also ensure that a health worker is appointed in every village. This act of making laws on certain issues is done in the Legislative Assembly of each state. The various government departments then implement these laws. Laws for the entire country are made in the Parliament. You will read more about the Parliament next year. In a democracy, it is the people who elect their representatives as Members of the Legislative Assembly (MLAs) and, thus, it is the people who have the main authority. The ruling party members then form the government and some members are appointed ministers. These ministers are in charge of various departments of the government such as In a democracy, people organise meetings health in the above example. Whatever work is done to voice their opinions and protest by these departments has to be approved by the against the government. members of the legislative assembly. Name of department Examples of their work School Education Public Works Department Agriculture A wallpaper project Find out with the help of your teacher, the work done by the A wallpaper is an interesting activity through which government departments research can be done on particular topics of interest. mentioned above, and fill in the The following photographs explain the different table. aspects involved in creating a wallpaper in a classroom. After introducing the topic and having a brief discussion with the whole class, the teacher divides the class into groups. The group discusses the issue and decides what it would like to include in the wall-paper. Children then work individually or in pairs to read the collected material and write their observations or experiences. They can do this through creating stories, poems, case studies, interviews, etc. The group looks at the material that they have selected, drawn or written. They read each other’s writing and provide feedback to each other. They make decisions on what should be included and finalise the layout for the wallpaper. Chapter 3: How the State Government Works 33 Each group then presents the wallpaper to the entire class. It is important that more than one member of the group is asked to present and that each group is allotted the same amount of time to discuss their work. After each group has presented, it would be a good idea to have a feedback session on the following – What more could they do on their own? How could their work be organised better? How could writing and presentation be improved upon? This wallpaper about the 2006 dengue epidemic was prepared by children of Class VI B of Kendriya Vidyalaya II, Hindon, Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh. Do a similar wallpaper project about any issue connected with the working of your State Government like an  education programme, any law and order issue, midday meal scheme, etc. 34 Social and Political Life EXERCISES 1. Use the terms ‘constituency’ and ‘represent’ to explain who an MLA is and how is the person elected? 2. How did some MLAs become Ministers? Explain. 3. Why should decisions taken by the Chief Minister and other ministers be debated in the Legislative Assembly? 4. What was the problem in Patalpuram? What discussion/ action was taken by the following? Fill in the table. Public meeting Legislative Assembly Press conference Chief Minister 5. What is the difference between the work that MLAs do in the Assembly and the work done by government departments? Glossary Constituency: A particular area from which all the voters living there choose their representatives. This could be, for example, a panchayat ward or an area that chooses an MLA. Majority: This is a situation when more than half the number in a group supports a decision or an idea. This is also called a simple majority. Opposition: This refers to elected representatives who are not members of the ruling party and who play the role of questioning government decisions and actions as well as raise new issues for consideration in the Assembly. Press Conference: A gathering of journalists from the media who are invited to hear about and ask questions on a particular issue and are then expected to report on this to the larger public. Chapter 3: How the State Government Works 35 UNIT THREE Gender Teacher’s note Gender is a term that you may often have Chapter 4 uses two case studies, situated heard. It is a term, however, that is not in different places and points in time to easily understood. It tends to remain show how girls and boys are brought up distant from our lives and restricted to or socialised differently. This enables them discussions during training programmes. to understand that the process of In fact, it is something that all of us socialisation is not uniform; instead it is experience in our lives on a daily basis. It socially determined and changes determines, for example, who we are and continuously over time. The chapter also what we will become, where we can go and addresses the fact that societies assign where not, the life choices available to us different values to the roles men and and those we eventually make. Our women play and the work they do, which understanding of gender is often based on becomes a basis for inequality and the family and society that we live in. This discrimination. Through a storyboard, leads us to think that the roles we see men students discuss the issue of housework. and women around us play are fixed and Done primarily by women, housework is natural. In fact, these roles differ across often not considered ‘work’ and, therefore communities around the world. By gender, made invisible and devalued. then, we mean the many social values and stereotypes our cultures attach to the  Chapter 5 further develops ideas around biological distinction ‘male’ and ‘female’. It gender inequalities in the world of work and is a term that helps us to understand many describes women’s struggles for equality. of the inequalities and power relations Through a classroom activity, students between men and women in society. begin questioning existing stereotypes regarding work and career choices. The The following two chapters explore the chapter also points out that opportunities concept of gender without actually using like education are not equally available to the term. Instead, through different boys and girls. By reading about the lives pedagogic tools like case studies, stories, of two Indian women, from the ninteenth classroom activities, data analysis and and twentieth centuries, students see how photographs, students are encouraged to women struggled to change their lives by question and think about their own lives learning to read and write. Change on a and the society around them. Gender is large scale usually takes place through often mistakenly thought to be something collective struggles. The chapter concludes that concerns women or girls alone. Thus, with a photo-essay that gives examples of care has been taken in these chapters to different strategies the women’s movement draw boys into the discussion as well. has used to fight for change. 37