Chapter 4 The Theory of the Firm under Perfect Competition In the previous chapter, we studied concepts related to a firm’s production function and cost curves. The focus of this chapter is different. Here we ask : how does a firm decide how much to produce? Our answer to this question is by no means simple or uncontroversial. We base our answer on a critical, if somewhat unreasonable, assumption about firm behaviour – a firm, we maintain, is a ruthless profit maximiser. So, the amount that a firm produces and sells in the market is that which maximises its profit. Here, we also assume that the firm sells whatever it produces so that ‘output’ and quantity sold are often used interchangebly. The structure of this chapter is as follows. We first set up and examine in detail the profit maximisation problem of a firm. Then,0 we derive a firm’s supply curve. The supply curve shows the levels of output that a firm chooses to produce at different  market prices. Finally, we study how to aggregate the supply curves of individual firms and obtain the market supply curve. 4.1 PERFECT COMPETITION: DEFINING FEATURES In order to analyse a firm’s profit maximisation problem, we must first specify the market environment in which the firm functions. In this chapter, we study a market environment called perfect competition. A perfectly competitive market has the following defining features: 1. The market consists of a large number of buyers and sellers 2. Each firm produces and sells a homogenous product. i.e., the product of one firm cannot be differentiated from the product of any other firm. 3. Entry into the market as well as exit from the market are free for firms. 4. Information is perfect. The existence of a large number of buyers and sellers means that each individual buyer and seller is very small compared to the size of the market. This means that no individual buyer or seller can influence the market by their size. Homogenous products further mean that the product of each firm is identical. So a buyer can choose to buy from any firm in the market, and she gets the same product. Free entry and exit mean that it is easy for firms to enter the market, as well as to leave it. This condition is essential Reprint 2024-25 for the large numbers of firms to exist. If entry was difficult, or restricted, then the number of firms in the market could be small. Perfect information implies that all buyers and all sellers are completely informed about the price, quality and other relevant details about the product, as well as the market. These features result in the single most distinguishing characteristic of perfect competition: price taking behaviour. From the viewpoint of a firm, what does price-taking entail? A price-taking firm believes that if it sets a price above the market price, it will be unable to sell any quantity of the good that it produces. On the other hand, should the set price be less than or equal to the market price, the firm can sell as many units of the good as it wants to sell. From the viewpoint of a buyer, what does price-taking entail? A buyer would obviously like to buy the good at the lowest possible price. However, a price-taking buyer believes that if she asks for a price below the market price, no firm will be willing to sell to her. On the other hand, should the price asked be greater than or equal to the market price, the buyer can obtain as many units of the good as she desires to buy. Price-taking is often thought to be a reasonable assumption when the market has many firms and buyers have perfect information about the price prevailing in the market. Why? Let us start with a situation where each firm in the market charges the same (market) price. Suppose, now, that a certain firm raises its price above the market price. Observe that since all firms produce the same good and all buyers are aware of the market price, the firm in question loses all its buyers. Furthermore, as these buyers switch their purchases to other firms, no “adjustment” problems arise; their demand is readily accommodated when there are so many other firms in the market. Recall, now, that an individual firm’s inability to sell any amount of the good at a price exceeding the market price is precisely what the price-taking assumption stipulates. 4.2 REVENUE We have indicated that in a perfectly competitive market, a firm believes that it 54 can sell as many units of the good as it wants by setting a price less than or equal to the market price. But, if this is the case, surely there is no reason to set a price lower than the market price. In other words, should the firm desire to sell some amount of the good, the price that it sets is exactly equal to the market price. A firm earns revenue by selling the good that it produces in the market. Let the market price of a unit of the good be p. Let q be the quantity of the good produced, and therefore sold, by the firm at price p. Then, total revenue (TR) of the firm is defined as the market price of the good (p) multiplied by the firm’s output (q). Hence, TR = p × q To make matters concrete, consider the following numerical example. Let the market for candles be perfectly competitive and let the market price of a box of candles be Rs 10. For a candle manufacturer, Table 4.1: Total Revenue Table 4.1 shows how total revenue is related to output. Notice that when no box is sold, Boxes sold   TR (in Rs) TR is equal to zero; if one box of candles is sold, 0  0 TR is equal to 1×Rs 10= Rs 10; if two boxes of 1 10 candles are produced, TR is equal to 2 × Rs 10 2 20 = Rs 20; and so on. 3 30 We can depict how the total revenue changes 4 40 as the quantity sold changes through a Total 5 50 Revenue Curve. A total revenue curve plots Reprint 2024-25 Introductory Microeconomics the quantity sold or output on the X-axis and the Revenue earned on Revenue the Y-axis. Figure 4.1 shows the total revenue curve of a firm. Three TR observations are relevant here. First, when the output is zero, the total revenue of the firm is also zero. Therefore, the TR curve A passes through point O. Second, the total revenue increases as the output goes up. Moreover, the equation ‘TR = p  × q’ is that of a O q1 Output straight line because p is constant. Fig. 4.1 This means that the TR curve is an upward rising straight line. Total Revenue curve. The total revenue curve of a firm shows the relationship between the total Third, consider the slope of this revenue that the firm earns and the output level of straight line. When the output is the firm. The slope of the curve, Aq /Oq , is the 1 1 one unit (horizontal distance Oq 1 market price. in Figure 4.1), the total revenue (vertical height Aq  in Figure 4.1) 1 is p × 1 = p. Therefore, the slope of the straight line is Aq /Oq  = p. Price 1 1 The average revenue ( AR ) of a firm is defined as total revenue per unit of output. Recall that if a firm’s output is q and the market Price Line p price is p, then TR equals p × q. Hence TR p × q AR = q  = q   = p 55 In other words, for a price-taking O Output firm, average revenue equals the market price. Fig. 4.2 Now consider Figure 4.2. Price Line. The price line shows the relationship Here, we plot the average revenue between the market price and a firm’s output level. or market price (y-axis) for The vertical height of the price line is equal to the different values of a firm’s output market price, p. (x-axis). Since the market price is fixed at p, we obtain a horizontal straight line that cuts the y-axis at a height equal to p. This horizontal straight line is called the price line. It is also the firm’s AR curve under perfect competition The price line also depicts the demand curve facing a firm. Observe that the demand curve is perfectly elastic. This means that a firm can sell as many units of the good as it wants to sell at price p. The marginal revenue (MR) of a firm is defined as the increase in total revenue for a unit increase in the firm’s output. Consider table 4.1 again. Total revenue from the sale of 2 boxes of candles is Rs.20. Total revenue from the sale of 3 boxes of candles is Rs.30. Change in total revenue 30 - 20 Marginal Revenue(MR) = = = 10 Changein quantity 3- 2 Reprint 2024-25 The Theory of the Firm under Perfect Competition Is it a coincidence that this is the same as the price? Actually it is not. Consider the situation when the firm’s output changes from q to q . Given the market 1 2 price p, MR = (pq –pq )/ (q –q ) 2 1 2 1 = [p (q –q )]/ (q –q ) 2 1 2 1 = p Thus, for the perfectly competitive firm, MR=AR=p In other words, for a price-taking firm, marginal revenue equals the market price. Setting the algebra aside, the intuition for this result is quite simple. When a firm increases its output by one unit, this extra unit is sold at the market price. Hence, the firm’s increase in total revenue from the one-unit output expansion – that is, MR – is precisely the market price. 4.3 PROFIT MAXIMISATION A firm produces and sells a certain amount of a good. The firm’s profit, denoted by 1 π , is defined to be the difference between its total revenue (TR) and its total cost of production (TC ). In other words π= TR – TC Clearly, the gap between TR and TC is the firm’s earnings net of costs. A firm wishes to maximise its profit. The firm would like to identify the quantity q  at which its profits are maximum. By definition, then, at any quantity other 0 than q , the firm’s profits are less than at q . The critical question is: how do we 0 0 identify q ? 0 For profits to be maximum, three conditions must hold at q : 0 1. The price, p, must equal MC 2. Marginal cost must be non-decreasing at q 0 3. For the firm to continue to produce, in the short run, price must be greater than the average variable cost (p > AVC); in the long run, price must be greater 56 than the average cost (p > AC). 4.3.1 Condition 1 Profits are the difference between total revenue and total cost. Both total revenue and total cost increase as output increases. Notice that as long as the change in total revenue is greater than the change in total cost, profits will continue to increase. Recall that change in total revenue per unit increase in output is the marginal revenue; and the change in total cost per unit increase in output is the marginal cost. Therefore, we can conclude that as long as marginal revenue is greater than marginal cost, profits are increasing. By the same logic, as long as marginal revenue is less than marginal cost, profits will fall. It follows that for profits to be maximum, marginal revenue should equal marginal cost. In other words, profits are maximum at the level of output (which we have called q ) for which MR = MC 0 For the perfectly competitive firm, we have established that the MR = P. So the firm’s profit maximizing output becomes the level of output at which P=MC. 4.3.2 Condition 2 Consider the second condition that must hold when the profit-maximising output level is positive. Why is it the case that the marginal cost curve cannot slope 1It is a convention in economics to denote profit with the Greek letter π . Reprint 2024-25 Introductory Microeconomics downwards at the profit- maximising output level? To answer this question, refer once again to Figure 4.3. Note that at output levels q  and q , the 1 4 market price is equal to the marginal cost. However, at the output level q , the marginal 1 cost curve is downward sloping. We claim that q  cannot be a 1 profit-maximising output level. Why? Observe that for all output levels slightly to the left of q , 1 the market price is lower than Conditions 1 and 2 for profit maximisation. the marginal cost. But, the The figure is used to demonstrate that when the argument outlined in  section market price is p, the output level of a profitmaximising firm cannot be q  (marginal cost curve, 4.3.1 immediately implies that 1 MC, is downward sloping), q  and q (market price 2 3 the firm’s profit at an output exceeds marginal cost), or q  and q (marginal cost 5 6 level slightly smaller than q 1 exceeds market price). exceeds that corresponding to the output level q . This being the case, q  cannot be a profit-maximising 1 1 output level. 4.3.3 Condition 3 Consider the third condition that Price, SMC costs must hold when the profit- maximising output level is positive. Notice that the third SAC condition has two parts: one part AVC applies in the short run while the 57 other applies in the long run. E B Case 1: Price must be greater p than or equal to AVC in the A short run O q1 We will show that the Output statement of Case 1 (see above) is Fig. 4.4 true by arguing that a profitPrice-AVC Relationship with Profit maximising firm, in the short run, Maximisation (Short Run).  The figure is used to will not produce at an output level demonstrate that a profit-maximising firm produces wherein the market price is lower zero output in the short run when the market price, than the AVC. p, is less than the minimum of its average variable cost (AVC). If the firm’s output level is q , the firm’s 1 Let us turn to Figure 4.4. total variable cost exceeds its revenue by an amount equal to the area of rectangle pEBA. Observe that at the output level q , 1 the market price p is lower than the AVC. We claim that q  cannot be a profit-maximising output level. Why? 1 Notice that the firm’s total revenue at q  is as follows 1 TR = Price × Quantity = Vertical height Op × width Oq 1 = The area of rectangle OpAq 1 Reprint 2024-25 The Theory of the Firm under Perfect Competition Similarly, the firm’s total variable cost at q  is as follows 1 TVC = Average variable cost × Quantity = Vertical height OE × Width Oq 1 = The area of rectangle OEBq 1 Now recall that the firm’s profit at q  is TR – (TVC + TFC); that is, [the area of 1 rectangle OpAq ] – [the area of rectangle OEBq ] – TFC. What happens if the firm 1 1 produces zero output? Since output is zero, TR and TVC are zero as well. Hence, the firm’s profit at zero output is equal to – TFC. But, the area of rectangle OpAq 1 is strictly less than the area of rectangle OEBq . Hence, the firm’s profit at q  is 1 1 [(area EBAp)-TFC], which is strictly less than what it obtains by not producing at all. So, the firm will choose not to produce at  all, and exit from the Price, LRMC market. costs Case 2: Price must be greater than or equal to AC in the LRAC long run We will show that the statement of E B Case 2 (see above) is true by arguing that a profit-maximising p firm, in the long run, will not A produce at an output level wherein the market price is lower O q1 Output than the AC. Fig. 4.5 Let us turn to Figure 4.5. Observe that at the output level q , Price-AC Relationship with Profit 1 Maximisation (Long Run). The figure is used to the market price p is lower than demonstrate that a profit-maximising firm the (long run) AC. We claim that produces zero output in the long run when the q  cannot be a profit-maximising 1 market price, p, is less than the minimum of its output level. Why? long run average cost (LRAC). If the firm’s output 58 Notice that the firm’s total level is q , the firm’s total cost exceeds its revenue 1 revenue, TR, at q  is the area of the by an amount equal to the area of rectangle pEBA. 1 rectangle OpAq  (the product of 1 price and quantity) while the firm’s total cost, TC , is the area of the rectangle OEBq  (the product of 1 average cost and quantity). Since the area of rectangle OEBq  is 1 larger than the area of rectangle OpAq , the firm incurs a loss at the 1 output level q . But, in the long 1 run set-up, a firm that shuts down production has a profit of zero. Again, the firm chooses to exit in this case. 4.3.4 The Profit Maximisation Problem: Graphical Representation Geometric Representation of Profit Maximisation (Short Run). Given market Using the material in sections 3.1, price p, the output level of a profit-maximising 3.2 and 3.3, let us graphically firm is q . At q , the firm’s profit is equal to the 0 0 represent a firm’s profit area of rectangle EpAB. Reprint 2024-25 Introductory Microeconomics maximisation problem in the short run. Consider Figure 4.6. Notice that the market price is p. Equating the market price with the (short run) marginal cost, we obtain the output level q . At q , observe that SMC slopes upwards 0 0 and p exceeds AVC. Since the three conditions discussed in sections 3.1-3.3 are satisfied at q , we maintain that the profit-maximising output level of the 0 firm is q . 0 What happens at q ? The total revenue of the firm at q  is the area of 0 0 rectangle OpAq  (the product of price and quantity) while the total cost at q  is 0 0 the area of rectangle OEBq  (the product of short run average cost and quantity). 0 So, at q , the firm earns a profit equal to the area of the rectangle EpAB. 0 4.4 SUPPLY CURVE OF A FIRM A firm’s ‘supply’ is the quantity that it chooses to sell at a given price, given technology, and given the prices of factors of production. A table describing the quantities sold by a firm at various prices, technology and prices of factors remaining unchanged, is called a supply schedule. We may also represent the information as a graph, called a supply curve. The supply curve of a firm shows the levels of output (plotted on the x-axis) that the firm chooses to produce corresponding to different values of the market price (plotted on the y-axis), again keeping technology and prices of factors of production unchanged. We distinguish between the short run supply curve and the long run supply curve. 4.4.1 Short Run Supply Curve of a Firm Let us turn to Figure 4.7 and derive a firm’s short run supply curve. We shall split this derivation into two parts. We first determine a firm’s profit-maximising output level when the market price is greater than or equal to the minimum AVC. This done, we determine the firm’s profit-maximising output level when the market price is less than the minimum AVC. 59 Case 1: Price is greater than or equal to the minimum AVC Price, Suppose the market price is p , SMC 1 costs which exceeds the minimum AVC. We start out by equating p  with 1 SMC on the rising part of the SMC SAC curve; this leads to the output level AVC q . Note also that the AVC at q 1 1 p1 does not exceed the market price, p . Thus, all three conditions 1 highlighted in section 3 are p2 satisfied at q . Hence, when the 1 market price is p , the firm’s O q 1 1 Output output level in the short run is Fig. 4.7 equal to q . 1 Market Price Values. The figure shows the Case 2: Price is less than the output levels chosen by a profit-maximising firm minimum AVC in the short run for two values of the market price: Suppose the market price is p , p  and p . When the market price is p , the output 1 2 1 2 which is less than the minimum level of the firm is q ; when the market price is 1 p , the firm produces zero output. AVC. We have argued (see 2 Reprint 2024-25 The Theory of the Firm under Perfect Competition condition 3 in section 3) that if a Price, profit-maximising firm produces costs Supply Curve a positive output in the short run, (SMC) then the market price, p , must be 2 SAC greater than or equal to the AVC at that output level. But notice AVC from Figure 4.7 that for all positive output levels, AVC strictly exceeds p . In other words, it cannot be the 2 case that the firm supplies a positive output. So, if the market O price is p , the firm produces zero Output 2 output. Fig. 4.8 Combining cases 1 and 2, we The Short Run Supply Curve of a Firm. The reach an important conclusion. A short run supply curve of a firm, which is based firm’s short run supply curve is on its short run marginal cost curve (SMC) and the rising part of the SMC curve average variable cost curve (AVC), is represented from and above the minimum AVC by the bold line. together with zero output for all prices strictly less than the minimum AVC. In figure 4.8, the bold line represents the short run supply curve of the firm. 4.4.2 Long Run Supply Curve of a Firm Let us turn to Figure 4.9 and Price, LRMC derive the firm’s long run supply costs curve. As in the short run case, we split the derivation into two LRAC parts. We first determine the firm’s p profit-maximising output level 1 when the market price is greater 60 than or equal to the minimum (long run) AC. This done, we determine the firm’s profit- p2 maximising output level when the market price is less than the O q1 Output minimum (long run) AC. Fig. 4.9 Case 1: Price greater than or Profit maximisation in the Long Run for equal to the minimum LRAC Different Market Price Values. The figure shows the output levels chosen by a profitSuppose the market price is p , 1 maximising firm in the long run for two values which exceeds the minimum of the market price: p  and p . When the market 1 2 LRAC. Upon equating p  with 1 price is p , the output level of the firm is q ; 1 1 LRMC on the rising part of the when the market price is p , the firm produces 2 LRMC curve, we obtain output zero output. level q . Note also that the LRAC 1 at q  does not exceed the market price, p . Thus, all three conditions 1 1 highlighted in section 3 are satisfied at q . Hence, when the market price is 1 p , the firm’s supplies in the long run become an output equal to q . 1 1 Case 2: Price less than the minimum LRAC Suppose the market price is p , which is less than the minimum LRAC. We have 2 Reprint 2024-25 Introductory Microeconomics argued (see condition 3 in section Price, Supply Curve(LRMC) 3) that if a profit-maximising firm costs produces a positive output in the long run, the market price, p , 2 LRAC must be greater than or equal to the LRAC at that output level. But notice from Figure 4.9 that for all positive output levels, LRAC strictly exceeds p . In other words, 2 it cannot be the case that the firm supplies a positive output. So, when the market price is p , the O Output 2 firm produces zero output. Fig. 4.10 Combining cases 1 and 2, we The Long Run Supply Curve of a Firm. The reach an important conclusion. A long run supply curve of a firm, which is based on firm’s long run supply curve is the its long run marginal cost curve (LRMC) and long rising part of the LRMC curve from run average cost curve (LRAC), is represented by and above the minimum LRAC the bold line. together with zero output for all prices less than the minimum LRAC. In Figure 4.10, the bold line represents the long run supply curve of the firm. 4.4.3 The Shut Down Point Previously, while deriving the supply curve, we have discussed that in the short run the firm continues to produce as long as the price remains greater than or equal to the minimum of AVC. Therefore, along the supply curve as we move down, the last price-output combination at which the firm produces positive output is the point of minimum AVC where the SMC curve cuts the AVC curve. Below this, there will be no production. This point is called the short run shut down point of the firm. In the long run, however, the shut down point is the 61 minimum of LRAC curve. 4.4.4 The Normal Profit and Break-even Point The minimum level of profit that is needed to keep a firm in the existing business is defined as normal profit. A firm that does not make normal profits is not going to continue in business. Normal profits are therefore a part of the firm’s total costs. It may be useful to think of them as an opportunity cost for entrepreneurship. Profit that a firm earns over and above the normal profit is called the super-normal profit. In the long run, a firm does not produce if it earns anything less than the normal profit. In the short run, however, it may produce even if the profit is less than this level. The point on the supply curve at which a firm earns only normal profit is called the break-even point of the firm. The point of minimum average cost at which the supply curve cuts the LRAC curve (in short run, SAC curve) is therefore the break-even point of a firm. Opportunity cost In economics, one often encounters the concept of opportunity cost. Opportunity cost of some activity is the gain foregone from the second best activity. Suppose you have Rs 1,000 which you decide to invest in your family business. What is the opportunity cost of your action? If you do not invest Reprint 2024-25 The Theory of the Firm under Perfect Competition this money, you can either keep it in the house-safe which will give you zero return or you can deposit it in either bank-1 or bank-2 in which case you get an interest at the rate of 10 per cent or 5 per cent respectively. So the maximum benefit that you may get from other alternative activities is the interest from the bank-1. But this opportunity will no longer be there once you invest the money in your family business. The opportunity cost of investing the money in your family business is therefore the amount of forgone interest from the bank-1. 4.5 DETERMINANTS OF A FIRM’S SUPPLY CURVE In the previous section, we have seen that a firm’s supply curve is a part of its marginal cost curve. Thus, any factor that affects a firm’s marginal cost curve is of course a determinant of its supply curve. In this section, we discuss two such factors. 4.5.1 Technological Progress Suppose a firm uses two factors of production – say, capital and labour – to produce a certain good. Subsequent to an organisational innovation by the firm, the same levels of capital and labour now produce more units of output. Put differently, to produce a given level of output, the organisational innovation allows the firm to use fewer units of inputs. It is expected that this will lower the firm’s marginal cost at any level of output; that is, there is a rightward (or downward) shift of the MC curve. As the firm’s supply curve is essentially a segment of the MC curve, technological progress shifts the supply curve of the firm to the right. At any given market price, the firm now supplies more units of output. 4.5.2 Input Prices A change in input prices also affects a firm’s supply curve. If the price of an 62 input (say, the wage rate of labour) increases, the cost of production rises. The consequent increase in the firm’s average cost at any level of output is usually accompanied by an increase in the firm’s marginal cost at any level of output; that is, there is a leftward (or upward) shift of the MC curve. This means that the firm’s supply curve shifts to the left: at any given market price, the firm now supplies fewer units of output. Impact of a unit tax on supply A unit tax is a tax that the government imposes per unit sale of output. For example, suppose that the unit tax imposed by the government is Rs 2. Then, if the firm produces and sells 10 units of the good, the total tax that the firm must pay to the government is 10 × Rs 2 = Rs 20. How does the long run supply curve of a firm change when a unit tax is imposed? Let us turn to figure 4.11. Before the unit tax is imposed, LRMC0 and LRAC0 are, respectively, the long run marginal cost curve and the long run average cost curve of the firm. Now, suppose the government puts in place a unit tax of Rs t. Since the firm must pay an extra Rs t for each unit of the good produced, the firm’s long run average cost and long run marginal cost at any level of output increases by Rs t. In Figure 4.11, LRMC1 and LRAC1 are, respectively, the long run marginal cost curve and the long run average cost curve of the firm upon imposition of the unit tax. Reprint 2024-25 Introductory Microeconomics Recall that the long run supply curve of a firm is the rising part of the LRMC curve from and above the minimum LRAC together with zero output for all prices less than the minimum LRAC. Using this observation in Figure 4.12, it is immediate that S0 and S1 are, respectively, the long run supply curve of the firm before and after the imposition of the unit tax. Notice that the unit tax shifts the firm’s long run supply curve to the left: at any given market price, the firm now supplies fewer units of output. 1 LRMC Price 1 S 0 S Costs 1 LRAC 0 LRMC 0 LRAC 0 p + t 0 p + t t 0 p 0 p O O q q 0 0 Output Output Fig. 4.11 Fig. 4.12 Cost Curves and the Unit Tax. LRAC0 Supply Curves and Unit Tax. S0 is the and LRMC0 are, respectively, the long run supply curve of a firm before a unit tax average cost curve and the long run is imposed. After a unit tax of Rs t is marginal cost curve of a firm before a unit imposed, S1 represents the supply curve tax is imposed. LRAC1 and LRMC1 are, of the firm. respectively, the long run average cost curve and the long run marginal cost curve of a firm after a unit tax of Rs t is imposed. 4.6 MARKET SUPPLY CURVE 63 The market supply curve shows the output levels (plotted on the x-axis) that firms in the market produce in aggregate corresponding to different values of the market price (plotted on the y-axis). How is the market supply curve derived? Consider a market with n firms: firm 1, firm 2, firm 3, and so on. Suppose the market price is fixed at p. Then, the output produced by the n firms in aggregate is [supply of firm 1 at price p] + [supply of firm 2 at price p] + ... + [supply of firm n at price p]. In other words, the market supply at price p is the summation of the supplies of individual firms at that price. Let us now construct the market supply curve geometrically with just two firms in the market: firm 1 and firm 2. The two firms have different cost structures. Firm 1 will not produce anything if the market price is less than p1  while firm 2 will not produce anything if the market price is less than p2 . Assume also that p2  is greater than p1 . In panel (a) of Figure 4.13 we have the supply curve of firm 1, denoted by S ; in panel (b), we have the supply curve of firm 2, denoted by S . Panel (c) of 1 2 Figure 4.13 shows the market supply curve, denoted by Sm. When the market price is strictly below p1 , both firms choose not to produce any amount of the good; hence, market supply will also be zero for all such prices. For a market Reprint 2024-25 The Theory of the Firm under Perfect Competition price greater than or equal to p1  but strictly less than p2 , only firm 1 will produce a positive amount of the good. Therefore, in this range, the market supply curve coincides with the supply curve of firm 1. For a market price greater than or equal to p2 , both firms will have positive output levels. For example, consider a situation wherein the market price assumes the value p  (observe that p 3 3 exceeds p2 ). Given p , firm 1 supplies q  units of output while firm 2 supplies q 3 3 4 units of output. So, the market supply at price p  is q , where q  = q  + q . Notice 3 5 5 3 4