Chapter Seven ALTERNATING CURRENT 7.1  INTRODUCTION We have so far considered direct current (dc) sources and circuits with dc sources. These currents do not change direction with time. But voltages and currents that vary with time are very common. The electric mains supply in our homes and offices is a voltage that varies like a sine function with time. Such a voltage is called alternating voltage (ac voltage) and the current driven by it in a circuit is called the alternating current (ac current)*. Today, most of the electrical devices we use require ac voltage. This is mainly because most of the electrical energy sold by power companies is transmitted and distributed as alternating current. The main reason for preferring use of ac voltage over dc voltage is that ac voltages can be easily and efficiently converted from one voltage to the other by means of transformers. Further, electrical energy can also be transmitted economically over long distances. AC circuits exhibit characteristics which are exploited in many devices of daily use. For example, whenever we tune our radio to a favourite station, we are taking advantage of a special property of ac circuits – one of many that you will study in this chapter. * The phrases ac voltage and ac current are contradictory and redundant, respectively, since they mean, literally, alternating current voltage and alternating current current. Still, the abbreviation ac to designate an electrical quantity displaying simple harmonic time dependance has become so universally accepted that we follow others in its use. Further, voltage – another phrase commonly used means potential difference between two points. 2024-25 Physics 7.2  AC VOLTAGE APPLIED TO A RESISTOR Figure 7.1 shows a resistor connected to a source ε of ac voltage. The symbol for an ac source in a circuit diagram is . We consider a source which produces sinusoidally varying potential difference across its terminals. Let this potential difference, also called ac voltage, be given by v = vm sinωt (7.1) where v  is the amplitude of the oscillating potential m difference and ω  is its angular frequency. Nicola Tesla  (1856 – 1943) Serbian-American scientist, inventor and genius. He conceived the idea of the rotating magnetic field, which is the basis of practically all alternating current machinery, and which helped usher in the age of FIGURE 7.1  AC voltage applied to a resistor. electric power. He also invented among other To find the value of current through the resistor, we things the induction motor, the polyphase system of ac apply Kirchhoff’s loop rule ∑ ε(t) = 0 (refer to Section power, and the high 3.12), to the circuit shown in Fig. 7.1 to get frequency induction coil v (the Tesla coil) used in radio m sinω t = i R and television sets and v other electronic equipment. i = m or   sinω t R The SI unit of magnetic field is named in his honour. Since R is a constant, we can write this equation as i = im sinω t (7.2) where the current amplitude i  is given by m v i = m m (7.3) R Equation (7.3) is Ohm’s law, which for resistors, works equally well for both ac and dc voltages. The voltage across a pure resistor and the current through it, given by Eqs. (7.1) and (7.2) are plotted as a function of time in Fig. 7.2. Note, in particular that both v and i reach zero, minimum and maximum values at the FIGURE 7.2 In a pure same time. Clearly, the voltage and current are in phase with resistor, the voltage and each other. current are in phase. The We see that, like the applied voltage, the current varies minima, zero and maxima sinusoidally and has corresponding positive and negative values occur at the same respective times. during each cycle. Thus, the sum of the instantaneous current values over one complete cycle is zero, and the average current 178 is zero. The fact that the average current is zero, however, does 2024-25 NICOLA TESLA (1856 – 1943) Alternating Current not mean that the average power consumed is zero and that there is no dissipation of electrical energy. As you know, Joule heating is given by i2R and depends on i2 (which is always positive whether i is positive or negative) and not on i. Thus, there is Joule heating and dissipation of electrical energy when an ac current passes through a resistor. The instantaneous power dissipated in the resistor is p = i2R = i 2 (7 4 mR sin2 ω t . ) The average value of p over a cycle is* p = < i2R > = < i2 2  7 5 a ] mR sin ω t >  [ . ( ) where the bar over a letter (here, p) denotes its average George Westinghouse value and <......> denotes taking average of the quantity (1846 – 1914) A leading inside the bracket. Since,  i2 and R are constants, m proponent of the use of p = i2 alternating current over mR < sin2 ωt > [7.5(b)] direct current. Thus, Using the trigonometric identity, sin2 wt = he came into conflict 1/2 (1– cos 2wt ), we have < sin2 wt > = (1/2) (1– < cos 2wt >) with Thomas Alva Edison, and since < cos2wt > = 0**, we have, an advocate of direct current. Westinghouse < 2 1 sin ω t > = was convinced that the 2 technology of alternating Thus, current was the key to 1 the electrical future. p = i2 m R [7.5(c)] He founded the famous 2 Company named after him To express ac power in the same form as dc power and enlisted the services (P = I2R), a special value of current is defined and used. of Nicola Tesla and It is called, root mean square (rms) or effective current other inventors in the (Fig. 7.3) and is denoted by I  or I. development of alternating rms current motors and apparatus for the transmission of high tension current, pioneering in large scale lighting. FIGURE 7.3 The rms current I is related to the peak  current i  by I = i / 2  = 0.707 i . m m m T 1 * The average value of a function F (t ) over a period T is given by F (t ) = ∫ F (t )dt T 0 T T t ** < t > = 1 1 sin 2ω 1 cos2ω ∫ cos2ω =  t dt [ ω T − ] T T   = sin 2 0 = 0 0 2ω 2ωT 179 0 2024-25 GEORGE WESTINGHOUSE (1846 – 1914) Physics It is defined by = 2 = 1 I i2 = i i m m 2 2 = 0.707 i (7.6) m In terms of I, the average power, denoted by P is 1 P = p = i2 2 m R = I R (7.7) 2 Similarly, we define the rms voltage or effective voltage by vm V =  = 0.707 v (7.8) 2 m From Eq. (7.3), we have v  = i R m m vm i = m or,  R 2 2 or,  V = IR (7.9) Equation (7.9) gives the relation between ac current and ac voltage and is similar to that in the dc case. This shows the advantage of introducing the concept of rms values. In terms of rms values, the equation for power [Eq. (7.7)] and relation between current and voltage in ac circuits are essentially the same as those for the dc case. It is customary to measure and specify rms values for ac quantities. For example, the household line voltage of 220 V is an rms value with a peak voltage of v  = m 2  V =  (1.414)(220 V) = 311 V In fact, the I or rms current is the equivalent dc current that would produce the same average power loss as the alternating current. Equation (7.7) can also be written as P = V2 / R = I V    (since V = I R ) Example 7.1 A light  bulb is rated at 100W for a 220 V supply. Find (a) the resistance of the bulb; (b) the peak voltage of the source; and (c) the rms current through the bulb. Solution (a) We are given P = 100 W and V = 220 V. The resistance of the bulb is V ( )2 2 220 V R = = = 484Ω P 100 W (b) The peak voltage of the source is v = 2V = 311V m (c) Since, P = I V P 100 W I    0.454A V 220 V 180 2024-25 EXAMPLE 7.1 Alternating Current 7.3 REPRESENTATION OF AC CURRENT AND VOLTAGE BY ROTATING VECTORS — PHASORS In the previous section, we learnt that the current through  a resistor is in phase with the ac voltage. But this is not so in the case  of an inductor, a capacitor or a combination  of these circuit elements. In order to show phase relationship between voltage and current in an ac circuit, we use the notion of phasors. The analysis of an ac circuit is facilitated by the use of a phasor diagram. A phasor* is a vector which rotates about the origin with angular speed w, as shown in Fig. 7.4. The vertical components of phasors V and I represent the sinusoidally varying quantities v and i. The magnitudes of phasors V and I represent  the amplitudes or the peak values v  and i  of these m m oscillating quantities. Figure 7.4(a) shows the FIGURE 7.4 (a) A phasor diagram for the voltage and current phasors and their circuit in Fig 7.1. (b) Graph of v and relationship at time t  for the case of an ac source i versus wt. 1 connected to a resistor i.e., corresponding to the circuit shown in Fig. 7.1. The projection of voltage and current phasors on vertical axis, i.e., v  sinw t and i  sinw t, m m respectively represent the value of voltage and current at that instant. As they rotate with frequency w, curves in Fig. 7.4(b) are generated. From Fig. 7.4(a) we see that phasors V and I for the case of a resistor are in the same direction. This is so for all times. This means that the phase angle between the voltage and the current is zero. 7.4  AC VOLTAGE APPLIED TO AN INDUCTOR Figure 7.5 shows an ac source connected to an inductor. Usually, inductors have appreciable resistance in their windings, but we shall assume that this inductor has negligible resistance. Thus, the circuit is a purely inductive ac circuit. Let the voltage across the source be v = v  sinw t. Using m the Kirchhoff’s loop rule, ∑ ε (t ) = 0 , and  since there is no resistor in the circuit, di v − L = 0 (7.10) dt where the second term is the self-induced Faraday FIGURE 7.5  An ac source emf in the inductor; and L is the self-inductance of connected to an inductor. * Though voltage and current in ac circuit are represented by phasors – rotating vectors, they are not vectors themselves. They are scalar quantities. It so happens that the amplitudes and phases of harmonically varying scalars combine mathematically in the same way as do the projections of rotating vectors of corresponding magnitudes and directions. The rotating vectors that represent harmonically varying scalar quantities are introduced only to provide us with a simple way of adding these quantities using a rule that we already know. 181 2024-25 Physics the inductor. The negative sign follows from Lenz’s law (Chapter 6). Combining Eqs. (7.1) and (7.10), we have di v v = = m sin ω t (7.11) dt L L Equation (7.11) implies that the equation for i(t), the current as a function of time, must be such that its slope di/dt is a sinusoidally varying quantity, with the same phase as the source voltage and an amplitude given by v /L. To obtain the current, we integrate di/dt with respect to m time: di v ∫ dt = m ∫ sin(ωt )dt dt L and get, v i = − m cos(ωt ) + constant ωL The integration constant has the dimension of current and is timeindependent. Since the source has an emf which oscillates symmetrically about zero, the current it sustains also oscillates symmetrically about zero, so that no constant or time-independent component of the current exists. Therefore, the integration constant is zero. Using − =  − π cos(ω t ) sin ω  t  , we have 2  i = im  t − π sin ω   (7.12) 2 vm where  im = ω is the amplitude of the current. The quantity w L is L analogous to the resistance and is called inductive reactance, denoted by X : L X  = w L (7.13) L The amplitude of the current is, then v i = m m (7.14) XL The dimension of inductive reactance is the same as that of resistance and its SI unit is ohm (W). The inductive reactance limits the current in a purely inductive circuit in the same way as the resistance limits the current in a purely resistive circuit. The inductive reactance is directly proportional to the inductance and to the frequency of the current. A comparison of Eqs. (7.1) and (7.12) for the source voltage and the current in an inductor shows that the current lags the voltage by p/2 or one-quarter (1/4) cycle. Figure 7.6 (a) shows the voltage and the current phasors in the present case at instant t . The current phasor I is p/2 1 behind the voltage phasor V. When rotated with frequency w counterclockwise, they generate the voltage and current given by Eqs. (7.1) and 182 (7.12), respectively and as shown in Fig. 7.6(b). 2024-25 Interactive animation on Phasor diagrams of ac circuits containing, R, L, C and RLC series circuits: http://www.animations.physics.unsw.edu.au//jw/AC.html Alternating Current FIGURE 7.6 (a) A Phasor diagram for the circuit in Fig. 7.5. (b) Graph of v and i versus wt. We see that the current reaches its maximum value later than the T = π/2 voltage by one-fourth of a period  o  . Y 4 ω  u have seen that an inductor has reactance that limits current similar to resistance in a dc circuit. Does it also consume power like a resistance? Let us try to find out. The instantaneous power supplied to the inductor is π pL = i v =   im sin t − v t  ω  × m sin (ω ) 2 = −imvm cos(ωt )sin(ωt ) i = − mvm sin (2ωt ) 2 So, the average power over a complete cycle is imv P m L = − sin (2ω t ) 2 imv = − m sin (2ω t ) = 0, 2 since the average of sin (2wt) over a complete cycle is  zero. Thus, the average power supplied to an inductor over one complete cycle is zero. Example 7.2 A pure inductor of 25.0 mH is connected to a source of 220 V. Find the inductive reactance and rms current in the circuit if the frequency of the source is 50 Hz. Solution The inductive reactance, X – = 2 πν 2 × 3.14 × 50 × 25 10 3 L L= × Ω = 7.85W The rms current in the circuit is V 220V I = = = 28A X L 7.85Ω 183 2024-25 EXAMPLE 7.2 Physics 7.5   AC VOLTAGE APPLIED TO A CAPACITOR Figure 7.7 shows an ac source e generating ac voltage v = v  sin wt m connected to a capacitor only, a purely capacitive ac circuit. When a capacitor is connected to a voltage source in a dc circuit, current will flow for the short time required to charge the capacitor. As charge accumulates on the capacitor plates, the voltage across them increases, opposing the current. That is, a capacitor in a dc circuit will limit or oppose the current as it charges. When the capacitor is fully charged, the current in the circuit falls to zero. When the capacitor is connected to an ac source, as in Fig. 7.7, it limits or regulates the current, but FIGURE 7.7  An ac source does not completely prevent the flow of charge. The connected to a capacitor. capacitor is alternately charged and discharged as the current reverses each half cycle. Let q  be the charge on the capacitor at any time t. The instantaneous voltage v across the capacitor is = q v (7.15) C From the Kirchhoff’s loop rule, the voltage across the source and the capacitor are equal, q vm sin ω t = C dq To find the current, we use the relation i = dt d i = (vmC sin ω t ) = ω C vm cos(ω t ) dt Using the relation,  π cos(ω t ) =  sin ω t + ,  2 we have i =  π im sin ω t +   (7.16) 2 where the amplitude of the oscillating current is i  = w Cv . We can rewrite m m it as v i m m = (1/ω C) Comparing it to  i = v /R for a purely resistive circuit, we find that m m (1/wC)  plays the role of resistance. It is called capacitive reactance and is denoted by X , c X = 1/wC (7.17) c so that the amplitude of the current is v 184 i = m m (7.18) XC 2024-25 Alternating Current The dimension of capacitive reactance is the same as that of resistance and its SI unit is ohm (Ω). The capacitive reactance limits the amplitude of the current in a purely capacitive circuit in the same way as the resistance limits the current in a purely resistive circuit. But it is inversely proportional to the frequency and the capacitance. A comparison of Eq. (7.16) with the FIGURE  7.8 (a) A Phasor diagram for the circuit equation of source voltage, Eq. (7.1) shows that in Fig. 7.7. (b) Graph of v and i versus ωt. the current is π/2 ahead of voltage. Figure 7.8(a) shows the phasor diagram at an instant t . Here the current 1 phasor I is π/2 ahead of the voltage phasor V as they rotate counterclockwise. Figure 7.8(b) shows the variation of voltage and current with time. We see that the current reaches its maximum value earlier than the voltage by one-fourth of a period. The instantaneous power supplied to the capacitor is p  = i v = i  cos(ωt)v  sin(ωt) c m m = i v  cos(ωt) sin(ωt) m m imvm = sin(2ωt ) (7.19) 2 So, as in the case of an inductor, the average power i = mvm sin(2ω i t mv P = m C ) sin(2ωt ) = 0 2 2 since <sin (2ωt)> = 0 over a complete cycle. Thus, we see that in the case of an inductor, the current lags the voltage by π/2 and in the case of a capacitor, the current leads the voltage by π/2. Example 7.3 A lamp is connected in series with a capacitor. Predict your observations for dc and ac connections. What happens in each case if the capacitance of the capacitor is reduced? Solution When a dc source is connected to a capacitor, the capacitor gets charged and after charging no current flows in the circuit and the lamp will not glow. There will be no change even if C is reduced. With ac source, the capacitor offers capacitative reactance (1/ωC ) and the current flows in the circuit. Consequently, the lamp will shine. Reducing C will increase reactance and the lamp will shine less brightly than before. Example 7.4 A 15.0 µF capacitor is connected to a 220 V, 50 Hz source. Find the capacitive reactance and the current (rms and peak) in the circuit. If the frequency is doubled, what happens to the capacitive reactance and the current? Solution  The capacitive reactance is 1 1 XC = = ν − = 212 Ω π C π 6 2 2 (50Hz)(15.0 ×10 F) The rms current is 185 2024-25 EXAMPLE 7.3  EXAMPLE 7.4 Physics V 220V I = = = 1.04A XC 212 Ω The peak current is im = 2I = (1.41)(1.04 A) = 1.47A This current oscillates between +1.47A and –1.47 A, and is ahead of the voltage by p/2. If the frequency is doubled, the capacitive reactance is halved and consequently, the current is doubled. Example 7.5 A light bulb and an open coil inductor are connected to an ac source through a key as shown in Fig. 7.9. FIGURE 7.9 The switch is closed and after sometime, an iron rod is inserted into the interior of the inductor. The glow of the light bulb (a) increases; (b) decreases; (c) is unchanged, as the iron rod is inserted. Give your answer with reasons. Solution  As the iron rod is inserted, the magnetic field inside the coil magnetizes the iron increasing the magnetic field inside it. Hence, the inductance of the coil increases. Consequently, the inductive reactance of the coil increases. As a result, a larger fraction of the applied ac voltage appears across the inductor, leaving less voltage across the bulb. Therefore, the glow of the light bulb decreases. 7.6  AC VOLTAGE APPLIED TO A SERIES  LCR CIRCUIT Figure 7.10 shows a series LCR circuit connected to an ac source e. As usual, we take the voltage of the source to be v = v sin wt. m If q is the charge on the capacitor and i the current, at time t, we have, from Kirchhoff’s loop rule: di q L + i R + = v (7.20) dt C We want to determine the instantaneous current i and its phase relationship to the applied alternating voltage v. We shall solve this problem by two methods. First, we use the technique of FIGURE 7.10 A series LCR circuit phasors and in the second method, we solve connected to an ac source. Eq. (7.20) analytically to obtain the time– 186 dependence of i . 2024-25 EXAMPLE 7.5  EXAMPLE 7.4 Alternating Current 7.6.1  Phasor-diagram solution From the circuit shown in Fig. 7.10, we see that the resistor, inductor and capacitor are in series. Therefore, the ac current in each element is the same at any time, having the same amplitude and phase. Let it be i = i  sin(wt+f ) (7.21) m where f is the phase difference between the voltage across the source and the current in the circuit. On the basis of what we have learnt in the previous sections, we shall construct a phasor diagram for the present case. Let I be the phasor representing the current in the circuit as given by Eq. (7.21). Further, let V , V , V , and V represent the voltage across the L R C inductor, resistor, capacitor and the source, respectively. From previous section, we know that V  is parallel to I, V  is p/2 R C behind I and V  is  p/2 ahead of I. V , V , V  and I L L R C are shown in Fig. 7.11(a) with apppropriate phaserelations. The length of these phasors or the amplitude of V , V  and V  are: R C L v  = i  R, v  = i  X , v = i X (7.22) Rm m Cm m C  Lm  m L The voltage Equation (7.20) for the circuit can be written as v  + v  + v  = v (7.23) L R C The phasor relation whose vertical component gives the above equation is FIGURE 7.11 (a) Relation between the phasors V , V , V , and I, (b) Relation V  + V  + V  = V (7.24) L R C L R C between the  phasors V , V , and (V  + V ) L R L C This relation is represented in Fig. 7.11(b). Since for the circuit in Fig. 7.10. V   and V  are always along the same line and in C L opposite directions, they can be combined into a single phasor (V  + V ) C L which has a magnitude ½v  – v ½. Since V is represented as the Cm Lm hypotenuse of a right-triangle whose sides are V  and (V  + V ), the R C L pythagorean theorem gives: v2 2 m = vRm + (vC vLm )2 m − Substituting the values of v , v , and v  from Eq. (7.22) into the above Rm Cm Lm equation, we have v2 2 m = (imR) + (im XC − im X L )2 = i2  2  + −  m R (XC X )2L  vm or,  im = R2 [7.25(a)] + (X X L )2C − By analogy to the resistance in a circuit, we introduce the impedance Z in an ac circuit: v i m m = [7.25(b)] Z where Z = R2 + (X − X (7.26) L )2 187 C 2024-25 Physics Since phasor I is always parallel to phasor V , the phase angle f R is the angle between V  and V and can be determined from R Fig. 7.12: tanφ vCm − v = Lm vRm Using Eq. (7.22), we have φ X − X tan = C L (7.27) R Equations (7.26) and (7.27) are graphically shown in Fig. (7.12). FIGURE 7.12  Impedance This is called Impedance diagram which is a right-triangle with diagram. Z as its hypotenuse. Equation 7.25(a) gives the amplitude of the current and Eq. (7.27) gives the phase angle. With these, Eq. (7.21) is completely specified. If X  > X , f is positive and the circuit is predominantly capacitive. C L Consequently, the current in the circuit leads the source voltage. If X  < X , f is negative and the circuit is predominantly inductive. C L Consequently, the current in the circuit lags  the source voltage. Figure 7.13 shows the phasor diagram and variation of v and i with w t for the case X  > X . C L Thus, we have obtained the amplitude and phase of current for an LCR series circuit using the technique of phasors. But this method of analysing ac circuits suffers from certain disadvantages. First, the phasor diagram say nothing about the initial condition. One can take any arbitrary value of t (say, t , as done throughout this chapter) 1 and draw different phasors which show the relative angle between different phasors. The solution so obtained is called the steady-state solution. This is not a general FIGURE 7.13 (a) Phasor diagram of V and I. solution. Additionally, we do have a (b) Graphs of v and i versus w t for a series LCR transient solution which exists even for circuit where X  > X . C L v = 0. The general solution is the sum of the transient solution and the steady-state solution. After a sufficiently long time, the effects of the transient solution die out and the behaviour of the circuit is described by the steady-state solution. 7.6.2  Resonance An interesting characteristic of the series RLC circuit is the phenomenon of resonance. The phenomenon of resonance is common among systems that have a tendency to oscillate at a particular frequency. This frequency is called the system’s natural frequency. If such a system is driven by an energy source at a frequency that is near the natural frequency, the amplitude of oscillation is found to be large. A familiar example of this phenomenon is a child on a swing. The swing has a natural frequency 188 for swinging back and forth like a pendulum. If the child pulls on the