Chapter Two ELECTROSTATIC POTENTIAL AND CAPACITANCE 2.1  INTRODUCTION In Chapters 5 and 7 (Class XI), the notion of potential energy was introduced. When an external force does work in taking a body from a point to another against a force like spring force or gravitational force, that work gets stored as potential energy of the body. When the external force is removed, the body moves, gaining kinetic energy and losing an equal amount of potential energy. The sum of kinetic and potential energies is thus conserved. Forces of this kind are called conservative forces. Spring force and gravitational force are examples of conservative forces. Coulomb force between two (stationary) charges is also a conservative force. This is not surprising, since both have inverse-square dependence on distance and differ mainly in the proportionality constants – the masses in the gravitational law are replaced by charges in Coulomb’s law. Thus, like the potential energy of a mass in a gravitational field, we can define electrostatic potential energy of a charge in an electrostatic field. Consider an electrostatic field E due to some charge configuration. First, for simplicity, consider the field E due to a charge Q placed at the origin. Now, imagine that we bring a test charge q from a point R to a point P against the repulsive force on it due to the charge Q. With reference 2024-25 Physics to Fig. 2.1, this will happen if Q and q are both positive or both negative. For definiteness, let us take Q, q > 0. Two remarks may be made here. First, we assume that the test charge q is so small that it does not disturb the original configuration, namely the charge Q at the origin (or else, we keep Q fixed at the origin by some FIGURE 2.1 A test charge q (> 0) is unspecified force). Second, in bringing the charge q from moved from the point R to the R to P, we apply an external force F  just enough to ext point P against the repulsive counter the repulsive electric force F (i.e, F = –F ). E ext E force on it by the charge Q (> 0) This means there is no net force on or acceleration of placed at the origin. the charge q when it is brought from R to P, i.e., it is brought with infinitesimally slow constant speed. In this situation, work done by the external force is the negative of the work done by the electric force, and gets fully stored in the form of potential energy of the charge q. If the external force is removed on reaching P, the electric force will take the charge away from Q – the stored energy (potential energy) at P is used to provide kinetic energy to the charge q in such a way that the sum of the kinetic and potential energies is conserved. Thus, work done by external forces in moving a charge q from R to P is W  = RP =    –  (2.1) This work done is against electrostatic repulsive force and gets stored as potential energy. At every point in electric field, a particle with charge q possesses a certain electrostatic potential energy, this work done increases its potential energy by an amount equal to potential energy difference between points R and P. Thus, potential energy difference ∆U = U P −UR = WRP (2.2) (Note here that this displacement is in an opposite sense to the electric force and hence work done by electric field is negative, i.e., –W .) RP Therefore, we can define electric potential energy difference between two points as the work required to be done by an external force in moving (without accelerating) charge q from one point to another for electric field of any arbitrary charge configuration. Two important comments may be made at this stage: (i) The right side of Eq. (2.2) depends only on the initial and final positions of the charge. It means that the work done by an electrostatic field in moving a charge from one point to another depends only on the initial and the final points and is independent of the path taken to go from one point to the other. This is the fundamental characteristic of a conservative force. The concept of the potential energy would not be meaningful if the work depended on the path. The path-independence of work done by an electrostatic field can be proved using the 46 Coulomb’s law. We omit this proof here. 2024-25 Electrostatic Potential and Capacitance (ii) Equation (2.2) defines potential energy difference in terms of the physically meaningful quantity work. Clearly, potential energy so defined is undetermined to within an additive constant.What this means is that the actual value of potential energy is not physically significant; it is only the difference of potential energy that is significant. We can always add an arbitrary constant a to potential energy at every point, since this will not change the potential energy difference: (U P + α ) − (UR + α ) = UP − UR Put it differently, there is a freedom in choosing the point where potential energy is zero. A convenient choice is to have electrostatic potential energy zero at infinity. With this choice, if we take the point R at infinity, we get from Eq. (2.2) Count Alessandro Volta (1745 – 1827) Italian W∞P = U P − U ∞ = U P (2.3) physicist, professor at Since the point P is arbitrary, Eq. (2.3) provides us with a Pavia. Volta established definition of potential energy of a charge q at any point. that the animal electriPotential energy of charge q at a point (in the presence of field city observed by Luigi due to any charge configuration) is the work done by the Galvani, 1737–1798, in experiments with frog external force (equal and opposite to the electric force) in muscle tissue placed in bringing the charge q from infinity to that point. contact with dissimilar metals, was not due to 2.2  ELECTROSTATIC POTENTIAL any exceptional property Consider any general static charge configuration. We define of animal tissues but was also generated potential energy of a test charge q in terms of the work done whenever any wet body on the charge q. This work is obviously proportional to q, since was sandwiched between the force at any point is qE, where E is the electric field at that dissimilar metals. This point due to the given charge configuration. It is, therefore, led him to develop the convenient to divide the work by the amount of charge q, so first voltaic pile, or that the resulting quantity is independent of q. In other words, battery, consisting of a work done per unit test charge is characteristic of the electric large stack of moist disks field associated with the charge configuration. This leads to of cardboard (electrolyte) sandwiched the idea of electrostatic potential V due to a given charge between disks of metal configuration. From Eq. (2.1), we get: (electrodes). Work done by external force in bringing a unit positive charge from point R to P  U −U  = V – V   P R P R  = (2.4  q  ) where V and V   are the electrostatic potentials at P and R, respectively. P R Note, as before, that it is not the actual value of potential but the potential difference that is physically significant. If, as before, we choose the potential to be zero at infinity, Eq. (2.4) implies: Work done by an external force in bringing a unit positive charge from infinity to a point = electrostatic potential (V ) at that point. 47 2024-25 COUNT ALESSANDRO VOLTA (1745 –1827) Physics In other words, the electrostatic potential (V ) at any point in a region with electrostatic field is the work done in bringing a unit positive charge (without acceleration) from infinity to that point. The qualifying remarks made earlier regarding potential energy also apply to the definition of potential. To obtain the work done per unit test charge, we should take an infinitesimal test charge FIGURE 2.2 Work done on a test charge q dq, obtain the work done dW in bringing it from by the electrostatic field due to any given infinity to the point and determine the ratio charge configuration is independent dW/dq. Also, the external force at every point of the of the path, and depends only on path is to be equal and opposite to the electrostatic its initial and final positions. force on the test charge at that point. 2.3  POTENTIAL DUE TO A POINT CHARGE Consider a point charge Q at the origin (Fig. 2.3). For definiteness, take Q to be positive. We wish to determine the potential at any point P with position vector r from the origin. For that we must calculate the work done in bringing a unit positive test charge from infinity to the point P. For Q > 0, the work done against the repulsive force on the test charge is positive. Since work done is independent of the path, we choose a convenient path – along the radial direction from infinity to the point P. At some intermediate point P¢ on the path, the electrostatic force on a unit positive charge is FIGURE 2.3 Work done in bringing a unit positive test charge from infinity to the Q ×1 point P, against the repulsive force of rˆ′ 4πε 2 0r ' (2.5) charge Q (Q > 0), is the potential at P due to the charge Q. where rˆ ′ is the unit vector along OP¢. Work done against this force from  r¢ to r¢ + Dr¢ is ∆ Q W = − ∆r ′ 2 6 4πε (2. ) 0r ' The negative sign appears because for Dr ¢ < 0, DW is positive. Total work done (W) by the external force is obtained by integrating Eq. (2.6) from r¢ = ¥ to r¢ = r, r = − Q Q r Q W ∫ dr ′ = = ∞ 4π 2 ( ε0r ′ 4πε0r ′ ∞ 4π 2.7) ε0r This, by definition is the potential at P due to the charge Q Q 48 V (r ) = . ) 4πε (2 8 0r 2024-25 Electrostatic Potential and Capacitance Equation (2.8) is true for any sign of the charge Q, though we considered Q > 0 in its derivation. For Q < 0, V < 0, i.e., work done (by the external force) per unit positive test charge in bringing it from infinity to the point is negative. This is equivalent to saying that work done by the electrostatic force in bringing the unit positive charge form infinity to the point P is positive. [This is as it should be, since for Q < 0, the force on a unit positive test charge is attractive, so that the electrostatic force and the displacement (from infinity to P) are FIGURE 2.4 Variation of potential V with r [in units of in the same direction.] Finally, we (Q/4pe ) m-1] (blue curve) and field with r [in units 0 of (Q/4pe ) m-2] (black curve) for a point charge Q. note that Eq. (2.8) is consistent with 0 the choice that potential at infinity be zero. Figure (2.4) shows how the electrostatic potential (  1/r ) and the electrostatic field (  1/r 2 ) varies with r. Example 2.1 (a) Calculate the potential at a point P due to a charge of 4 × 10–7C located 9 cm away. (b) Hence obtain the work done in bringing a charge of 2 × 10–9 C from infinity to the point P. Does the answer depend on the path along which the charge is brought? Solution (a) = 4 × 104 V (b) W = qV = 2 × 10–9C × 4 × 104V = 8 × 10–5 J No, work done will be path independent. Any arbitrary infinitesimal path can be resolved into two perpendicular displacements: One along r and another perpendicular to r. The work done corresponding to the later will be zero. 2.4  POTENTIAL DUE TO AN ELECTRIC DIPOLE As we learnt in the last chapter, an electric dipole consists of two charges q and  –q separated by a (small) distance 2a. Its total charge is zero. It is characterised by a dipole moment vector p whose magnitude is q × 2a and which points in the direction from –q to q (Fig. 2.5). We also saw that the electric field of a dipole at a point with position vector r depends not just on the magnitude r, but also on the angle between r and p. Further, 49 2024-25 EXAMPLE 2.1 Physics the field falls off, at large distance, not as 1/r 2 (typical of field due to a single charge) but as 1/r3. We, now, determine the electric potential due to a dipole and contrast it with the potential due to a single charge. As before, we take the origin at the centre of the dipole. Now we know that the electric field obeys the superposition principle. Since potential is related to the work done by the field, electrostatic potential also follows the superposition principle. Thus, the potential due to the dipole is the sum of potentials due to the charges q and –q  q  V = 1 q − E 2.5 Quantities involved in the calculation π  (2.9) FIGUR 4 ε0  r1 r2  of potential due to a dipole. where r  and r  are the distances of the 1 2 point P from q and –q, respectively. Now, by geometry, r 2 = r 2 + a2 1 − 2ar cosq r 2 2 = r 2 + a2 + 2ar  cosq (2.10) We take r much greater than a ( r  a ) and retain terms only upto the first order in a/r  2 2 2a cosθ a  r1 = r 2 1 − +  r r 2  2  2a cosθ  ≅ r 1 −  (2.11) r  Similarly, sθ  r 2 2 ≅ r 2  1 + 2a co  (2.12) r  Using the Binomial theorem and retaining terms upto the first order in a/r ; we obtain, − 1/2 1 ≅ 1   − 2a cosθ  1  a  1  ≅ 1 + cosθ [2.13(a)] r r  r r  1 r − 1/2 1 ≅ 1  1 + 2a cosθ  1  a    ≅ 1 − cosθ [2.13(b)] r2 r r r r  Using Eqs. (2.9) and (2.13) and p = 2qa, we get = q 2acosθ = p cosθ V (2.14) 4πε r 2 4π 2 0 ε0r 50 Now, p cos q = p.r̂ 2024-25 Electrostatic Potential and Capacitance where r̂  is the unit vector along the position vector OP. The electric potential of a dipole is then given by 1 p.r̂ V = ; 4π 2     (r >> a)  (2.15) ε0 r Equation (2.15) is, as indicated, approximately true only for distances large compared to the size of the dipole, so that higher order terms in a/r are negligible. For a point dipole p at the origin, Eq. (2.15) is, however, exact. From Eq. (2.15), potential on the dipole axis (q = 0, p ) is given by 1 p V = ± 2 2 1 ) 4πε ( . 6 0 r (Positive sign for q = 0, negative sign for q = p.) The potential in the equatorial plane (q = p/2) is zero. The important contrasting features of electric potential of a dipole from that due to a single charge are clear from Eqs. (2.8) and (2.15): (i) The potential due to a dipole depends not just on r but also on the angle between the position vector  r and the dipole moment vector p. (It is, however, axially symmetric about p. That is, if you rotate the position vector r  about  p, keeping q fixed, the points corresponding to P on the cone so generated will have the same potential as at P.) (ii) The electric dipole potential falls off, at large distance, as 1/ 2 r , not as 1/r, characteristic of the potential due to a single charge. (You can refer to the Fig. 2.5 for graphs of 1/ 2 r  versus r and 1/r versus r, drawn there in another context.) 2.5  POTENTIAL DUE TO A SYSTEM OF CHARGES Consider a system of charges q , q ,…, q  with position vectors r , r ,…, 1 2 n 1 2 r relative to some origin (Fig. 2.6). The potential V at P due to the charge n 1 q  is 1 1 q V 1 1 = 4πε0 r1P where r  is the distance between q  and P. 1P 1 Similarly, the potential V at P due to q  and 2 2 V  due to q  are given by 3 3 1 q2 1 q V2 = 3 4πε , V3 = 0 r2P 4πε0 r3P where r  and r  are the distances of P from 2P 3P charges q  and q , respectively; and so on for the 2 3 potential due to other charges. By the FIGURE 2.6 Potential at a point due to a superposition principle, the potential V at P due system of charges is the sum of potentials to the total charge configuration is the algebraic due to individual charges. sum of the potentials due to the individual charges V = V + V + ... + V (2.17) 51 1 2 n 2024-25 Physics 1  q  = 1 q2 q  + + ...... + n 2.18) 4π  ( ε0 r P r P rn 1 2 P If we have a continuous charge distribution characterised by a charge density r (r), we divide it, as before, into small volume elements each of size Dv and carrying a charge rDv. We then determine the potential due to each volume element and sum (strictly speaking , integrate) over all such contributions, and thus determine the potential due to the entire distribution. We have seen in Chapter 1 that for a uniformly charged spherical shell, the electric field outside the shell is as if the entire charge is concentrated at the centre. Thus, the potential outside the shell is given by = 1 q V 4πε0 r    (r ≥ R) [2.19(a)] where q is the total charge on the shell and R its radius. The electric field inside the shell is zero. This implies (Section 2.6) that potential is constant inside the shell (as no work is done in moving a charge inside the shell), and, therefore, equals its value at the surface, which is = 1 q V 4πε R [2.19(b)] 0 Example 2.2 Two charges 3 × 10–8 C and –2 × 10–8 C are located 15 cm apart. At what point on the line joining the two charges is the electric potential zero? Take the potential at infinity to be zero. Solution Let us take the origin O at the location of the positive charge. The line joining the two charges is taken to be the x-axis;  the negative charge is taken to be on the right side of the origin (Fig. 2.7). FIGURE 2.7 Let P be the required point on the x-axis where the potential is zero. If x is the x-coordinate of P, obviously x must be positive. (There is no possibility of potentials due to the two charges adding up to zero for x < 0.) If x lies between O and A, we have 1  3 ×10–8 2 ×10–8  2 − = 0 4π  – ε0  x ×10 (15 − )×10–2  x  where x is in cm. That is, 3 − 2 = 0 x 15 − x which gives x  =  9 cm. If x lies on the extended line OA, the required condition is 3 − 2 = 0 x x −15 52 2024-25 EXAMPLE 2.2 Electrostatic Potential and Capacitance which gives x  = 45 cm Thus, electric potential is zero at 9 cm and 45 cm away from the positive charge on the side of the negative charge. Note that the formula for potential used in the calculation required choosing potential to be zero at infinity. Example 2.3  Figures 2.8 (a) and (b) show the field lines of a positive and negative point charge respectively. FIGURE 2.8 (a) Give the signs of the potential difference V – V ; V  – V . P Q B A (b) Give the sign of the potential energy difference of a small negative charge between the points Q and P; A and B. (c) Give the sign of the work done by the field in moving a small positive charge from Q to P. (d) Give the sign of the work done by the external agency in moving a small negative charge from B to A. (e) Does the kinetic energy of a small negative charge increase or decrease in going from B to A? Solution 1 (a) As V ∝ , V  > V . Thus, (V – V ) is positive. Also V  is less negative r P Q P Q B than V  .  Thus, V  > V  or (V – V ) is positive. A B A B A (b) A small negative charge will be attracted towards positive charge. The negative charge moves from higher potential energy to lower potential energy. Therefore the sign of potential energy difference of a small negative charge between Q and P is positive. Similarly, (P.E.)  > (P.E.)  and hence sign of potential energy A B differences is positive. (c) In moving a small positive charge from Q to P, work has to be done by an external agency against the electric field. Therefore, work done by the field is negative. (d) In moving a small negative charge from B to A work has to be done by the external agency. It is positive. (e) Due to force of repulsion on the negative charge, velocity decreases and hence the kinetic energy decreases in going from B to A. 53 2024-25 Electric potential, equipotential surfaces: http://video.mit.edu/watch/4-electrostatic-potential-elctric-energy-ev-conservative-fieldequipotential-sufaces-12584/ EXAMPLE 2.2  EXAMPLE 2.3 Physics 2.6  EQUIPOTENTIAL SURFACES An equipotential surface is a surface with a constant value of potential at all points on the surface. For a single charge q, the potential is given by Eq. (2.8): 1 q V = 4πεo r This shows that V is a constant if r is constant. Thus, equipotential surfaces of a single point charge are concentric spherical surfaces centred at the charge. Now the electric field lines for a single charge q are radial lines starting from or ending at the charge, depending on whether q is positive or negative. Clearly, the electric field at every point is normal to the equipotential surface passing through that point. This is true in general: for any charge configuration, equipotential surface through a point is normal to the electric field at that point. The proof of this statement is simple. If the field were not normal to the equipotential surface, it would have non-zero component along the surface. To move a unit test charge against the direction of the component of the field, work would have to be done. But this is in contradiction to the definition of an equipotential FIGURE 2.9 For a surface: there is no potential difference between any two points on the single charge q surface and no work is required to move a test charge on the surface. (a) equipotential The electric field must, therefore, be normal to the equipotential surface surfaces are at every point. Equipotential surfaces offer an alternative visual picture spherical surfaces in addition to the picture of electric field lines around a charge centred at the configuration. charge, and (b) electric field lines are radial, starting from the charge if q > 0. FIGURE 2.10 Equipotential surfaces for a uniform electric field. For a uniform electric field E, say, along the x-axis, the equipotential surfaces are planes normal to the x-axis, i.e., planes parallel to the y-z plane (Fig. 2.10). Equipotential surfaces for (a) a dipole and (b) two identical positive charges  are shown in Fig. 2.11. FIGURE 2.11 Some equipotential surfaces for (a) a dipole, 54 (b) two identical positive charges. 2024-25 Electrostatic Potential and Capacitance 2.6.1  Relation between field and potential Consider two closely spaced equipotential surfaces A and B (Fig. 2.12) with potential values V and V + d V, where d V is the change in V in the direction of the electric field E. Let P be a point on the surface B. d l is the perpendicular distance of the surface A from P. Imagine that a unit positive charge is moved along this perpendicular from the surface B to surface A against the electric field. The work done in this process is |E|d l. This work equals the potential difference V –V . A B Thus, |E|d l = V – (V + dV )= – dV V i.e., |E|= − δ (2.20) δl Since dV is negative, dV = – |dV|. we can rewrite FIGURE 2.12 From the Eq (2.20) as potential to the field. E = − δV δV = + (2.21) δl δl We thus arrive at two important conclusions concerning the relation between electric field and potential: (i) Electric field is in the direction in which the potential decreases steepest. (ii) Its magnitude is given by the change in the magnitude of potential per unit displacement normal to the equipotential surface at the point. 2.7  POTENTIAL ENERGY OF A SYSTEM OF CHARGES Consider first the simple case of two charges q and q  with position vector 1 2 r  and r  relative to some origin. Let us calculate the work done 1 2 (externally) in building up this configuration. This means that we consider the charges q  and q  initially at infinity and determine the work done by 1 2 an external agency to bring the charges to the given locations. Suppose, first the charge q  is brought from infinity to the point r . There is no 1 1 external field against which work needs to be done, so work done in bringing q  from infinity to r  is zero. This charge produces a potential in 1 1 space given by 1 q V = 1 1 4πε0 r1P where r  is the distance of a point P in space from the location of q . 1P 1 From the definition of potential, work done in bringing charge q  from 2 infinity to the point r  is q times the potential at r  due to q : 2 2 2 1 1 q1q2 work done on q = 2 4πε 5 0 r 5 12 2024-25 Physics where r  is the distance between points 1 and 2. 12 Since electrostatic force is conservative, this work gets stored in the form of potential energy of the system. Thus, the potential energy of a system of two charges q and q  is 1 2 FIGURE 2.13 Potential energy of a 1 q q U = 1 2 system of charges q  and q  is 1 2 4π (2.22) ε0 r12 directly proportional to the product of charges and inversely to the Obviously, if q  was brought first to its present location and 2 distance between them. q  brought later, the potential energy U would be the same. 1 More generally, the potential energy expression, Eq. (2.22), is unaltered whatever way the charges are brought to the specified locations, because of path-independence of work for electrostatic force. Equation (2.22) is true for any sign of  q and q . If q q > 0, potential 1 2 1 2 energy is positive. This is as expected, since for like charges (q q > 0), 1 2 electrostatic force is repulsive and a positive amount of work is needed to be done against this force to bring the charges from infinity to a finite distance apart. For unlike charges (q q < 0), the electrostatic force is 1 2 attractive. In that case, a positive amount of work is needed against this force to take the charges from the given location to infinity. In other words, a negative amount of work is needed for the reverse path (from infinity to the present locations), so the potential energy is negative. Equation (2.22) is easily generalised for a system of any number of point charges. Let us calculate the potential energy of a system of three charges q , q and q  located at r , r , r , respectively. To bring q  first 1  2 3 1  2 3 1 from infinity to r , no work is required. Next we bring q from infinity to 1 2 r . As before, work done in this step is 2 1 q q V1(r 1q 2 ) = 2 2 (2.23) 4πε0 r12 The charges q  and q produce a potential, which at any point P is 1 2 given by 1  q q  V = 1 + 2 1,2 (2.24) 4π  ε0  r1P r2P  Work done next in bringing q from infinity to the point r is  q times 3 3 3 V at r 1, 2 3 1  q q q  q 1 3 2q3 3V1,2(r3 ) = + 2.25) 4π  ε0  r  ( 13 r23  The total work done in assembling the charges at the given locations is obtained by adding the work done in different steps [Eq. (2.23) and Eq. (2.25)], 1  q q q q q q  U = 1 2 + 1 3 + 2 3 (2.26) FIGURE 2.14 Potential energy of a 4πε  r12 r13 r23 0 system of three charges is given by Again, because of the conservative nature of the Eq. (2.26), with the notation given electrostatic force (or equivalently, the path in the figure. independence of work done), the final expression for U, Eq. (2.26), is independent of the manner in which 56 the configuration is assembled. The potential energy 2024-25 Electrostatic Potential and Capacitance is characteristic of the present state of configuration, and not the way the state is achieved. Example 2.4 Four charges are arranged at the corners of a square ABCD of side d, as shown in Fig. 2.15.(a) Find the work required to put together this arrangement. (b) A charge q  is brought to the centre 0 E of the square, the four charges being held fixed at its corners. How much extra work is needed to do this? FIGURE 2.15 Solution (a) Since the work done depends on the final arrangement of the charges, and not on how they are put together, we calculate work needed for one way of putting the charges at A, B, C and D. Suppose, first the charge +q is brought to A, and then the charges –q, +q, and –q are brought to B, C and D, respectively. The total work needed can be calculated in steps: (i) Work needed to bring charge +q to A when no charge is present elsewhere: this is zero.