Chapter Four MOVING CHARGES AND MAGNETISM 4.1  INTRODUCTION Both Electricity and Magnetism have been known for more than 2000 years. However, it was only about 200 years ago, in 1820, that it was realised that they were intimately related. During a lecture demonstration in the summer of 1820, Danish physicist Hans Christian Oersted noticed that a current in a straight wire caused a noticeable deflection in a nearby magnetic compass needle. He investigated this phenomenon. He found that the alignment of the needle is tangential to an imaginary circle which has the straight wire as its centre and has its plane perpendicular to the wire. This situation is depicted in Fig.4.1(a). It is noticeable when the current is large and the needle sufficiently close to the wire so that the earth’s magnetic field may be ignored. Reversing the direction of the current reverses the orientation of the needle [Fig. 4.1(b)]. The deflection increases on increasing the current or bringing the needle closer to the wire. Iron filings sprinkled around the wire arrange themselves in concentric circles with the wire as the centre [Fig. 4.1(c)]. Oersted concluded that moving charges or currents produced a magnetic field in the surrounding space. Following this, there was intense experimentation. In 1864, the laws obeyed by electricity and magnetism were unified and formulated by 2024-25 Physics James Maxwell who then realised that light was electromagnetic waves. Radio waves were discovered by Hertz, and produced by  J.C.Bose and G. Marconi by the end of the 19th century. A  remarkable scientific and technological progress took place in the 20th century. This was due to our increased understanding of electromagnetism and the invention of devices for production, amplification, transmission and detection of electromagnetic waves. FIGURE 4.1 The magnetic field due to a straight long current-carrying wire. The wire is perpendicular to the plane of the paper. A ring of compass needles surrounds the wire. The orientation of the needles is shown when (a) the current emerges out of the plane of the paper, (b) the current moves into the plane of the paper. (c) The arrangement of iron filings around the wire. The darkened ends of the needle represent north poles. The effect of the earth’s magnetic field is neglected. In this chapter, we will see how magnetic field exerts forces on moving charged particles, like electrons, protons, and current-carrying wires. We shall also learn how currents produce magnetic fields. We shall see how particles can be accelerated to very high energies in a cyclotron. We shall study how currents and voltages are detected by a galvanometer. In this and subsequent Chapter on magnetism, we adopt the following convention: A current or a field (electric or magnetic) emerging out of the plane of the paper is depicted by a dot (¤). A current or a field going into the plane of the paper is depicted by a cross ( )*. Hans Christian Oersted Figures. 4.1(a) and 4.1(b) correspond to these two (1777–1851) Danish situations, respectively. physicist and chemist, professor at Copenhagen. 4.2  MAGNETIC FORCE He observed that a compass needle suffers a 4.2.1  Sources and fields deflection when placed near a wire carrying an Before we introduce the concept of a magnetic field B, we electric current. This shall recapitulate what we have learnt in Chapter 1 about discovery gave the first the electric field E. We have seen that the interaction empirical evidence of a between two charges can be considered in two stages. connection between electric The charge Q, the source of the field, produces an electric and magnetic phenomena. field E, where * A dot appears like the tip of an arrow pointed at you, a cross is like the feathered 108 tail of an arrow moving away from you. 2024-25 HANS CHRISTIAN OERSTED  (1777–1851) Moving Charges and Magnetism E = Q r̂ / (4 2 pe )r (4.1) 0 where r̂  is unit vector along r,  and  the field E is a vector field. A charge q interacts with this field and experiences a force F given by F  =  q  E   = q Q r̂   / (4pe ) r 2 (4.2) 0 As pointed out in the Chapter 1, the field E is not just an artefact but has a physical role. It can  convey  energy and momentum and is not established instantaneously but takes finite time to propagate. The concept of a field was specially stressed by Faraday  and was incorporated by Maxwell in his unification of electricity and magnetism. In addition to depending on each point in space, it can also vary with time, i.e., be a function of time.  In our Hendrik Antoon Lorentz discussions in this chapter, we will assume that the fields (1853 – 1928) Dutch do not change with time. theoretical physicist, The field at a particular point can be due to one or professor at Leiden. He investigated the more charges. If there are more charges the fields add relationship between vectorially. You have already learnt in Chapter 1 that this electricity, magnetism, and is called the principle of superposition. Once the field is mechanics. In order to known, the force on a test charge is given by Eq. (4.2). explain the observed effect Just as static charges produce an electric field, the of magnetic fields on currents or moving charges produce (in addition) a emitters of light (Zeeman magnetic field, denoted by B (r), again a vector field. It effect), he postulated the has several basic properties identical to the electric field. existence of electric charges in the atom, for which he It is defined at each point in space (and can in addition was awarded the Nobel Prize depend on time). Experimentally, it is found to obey the in 1902. He derived a set of principle of superposition: the magnetic field of several transformation equations sources is the vector addition of magnetic field of each (known after him, as individual source. Lorentz transformation equations) by some tangled 4.2.2  Magnetic Field,  Lorentz  Force mathematical arguments, Let us suppose that there is  a point charge q (moving but he was not aware that these equations hinge on a with a velocity v and, located at r at a given time t ) in new concept of space and presence of both the electric field E (r) and the magnetic time. field B (r).  The force on an electric charge q due to both of them can be written as F   = q [ E (r) +  v × B (r)] º F  +F (4.3) electric magnetic This force was given first  by H.A. Lorentz based on the extensive experiments of Ampere and others. It is called the Lorentz force. You have already studied in detail the force due to the electric field. If we look at the interaction with the magnetic field, we find the following features. (i) It depends on q, v and B (charge of the particle, the velocity and the magnetic field). Force on a negative charge is opposite to that on a positive charge. (ii) The magnetic force q [ v × B ] includes a vector product of velocity and magnetic field. The vector product makes the force due to magnetic 109 2024-25 HENDRIK ANTOON LORENTZ (1853 – 1928) Physics field vanish (become zero) if  velocity and magnetic field are parallel or anti-parallel. The force acts in a (sideways) direction perpendicular to both the velocity and the magnetic field. Its direction  is given by the screw rule or right hand rule  for vector (or cross) product as illustrated in Fig. 4.2. (iii) The magnetic force is zero if  charge is not moving (as then |v|= 0).  Only a moving charge feels the magnetic force. The expression for the magnetic force helps us to define the unit of the magnetic field, if one FIGURE 4.2 The direction of the magnetic takes q, F and v, all to be unity in the force force acting on a charged particle. (a) The equation F = q [ v × B] =q v B sin q n̂ ,  where q is force on a positively charged particle with the angle between v and B [see  Fig. 4.2 (a)]. The velocity v and making an angle q with the magnitude of magnetic field B is 1 SI unit, when magnetic field B is given by the right-hand the force acting on a unit charge (1 C), moving rule. (b) A moving charged particle q is perpendicular to B with a speed 1m/s, is one deflected in an opposite sense to –q in the presence of magnetic field. newton. Dimensionally, we have [B] = [F/qv] and the unit of B are Newton second / (coulomb metre).  This unit is called tesla (T ) named after Nikola Tesla (1856 – 1943). Tesla is a rather large unit. A smaller  unit (non-SI) called gauss (=10–4 tesla) is also often used. The earth’s magnetic field is about 3.6 × 10–5 T. 4.2.3  Magnetic force on a current-carrying conductor We can extend the analysis for force due to magnetic field on a single moving charge to a straight rod carrying current. Consider a rod of a uniform cross-sectional area A and length l. We shall assume one kind of mobile carriers as in a conductor (here electrons). Let the number density of these mobile charge carriers in it be n. Then the total number of mobile charge carriers in it is nlA. For a steady current I in this conducting rod, we may assume that each mobile carrier has an average drift velocity v  (see Chapter 3). In the presence of an external magnetic d field B, the force on these carriers is: F = (nlA)q v  ´ B d where q is the value of the charge on  a carrier.  Now nq v  is the current d density j and |(nq v )|A is the current I (see Chapter 3 for the discussion d of current and current density). Thus, F = [(nq v )lA] × B = [ jAl ] ´ B d = Il ´ B (4.4) where l is a vector of magnitude l, the length of the rod, and with a direction identical to the current I. Note that the current I is not a vector. In the last step leading to Eq. (4.4), we have transferred the vector sign from  j to l. Equation (4.4) holds for a straight rod. In this equation, B is the external magnetic field. It is not the field produced by the current-carrying rod. If the wire has an arbitrary shape we can calculate the Lorentz force on it by considering it as a collection of linear strips dl  and summing j F   Idl j × B j 110 This summation can be converted to an integral in most cases. 2024-25 Moving Charges and Magnetism Example 4.1 A straight wire of mass 200 g and length 1.5 m carries a current of 2 A. It is suspended in mid-air by a uniform horizontal magnetic field B (Fig. 4.3). What is the magnitude of the magnetic field? FIGURE 4.3 Solution  From Eq. (4.4), we find that there is an upward force F, of magnitude IlB,. For mid-air suspension, this must be balanced by the force due to gravity: m g = I lB m g B = I l = 0.2 × 9.8 = 0.65 T 2 ×1.5 Note that it would have been sufficient to specify m/l, the mass per unit length of the wire. The earth’s magnetic field is approximately 4 × 10–5 T and we have ignored it. Example 4.2 If the magnetic field is parallel to the positive y-axis and the charged particle is moving along the positive x-axis (Fig. 4.4), which way would the Lorentz force be for (a) an electron (negative charge), (b) a proton (positive charge). FIGURE 4.4 Solution   The velocity v of particle is along the x-axis, while B, the magnetic field is along the y-axis, so v × B is along the z-axis (screw rule or right-hand thumb rule). So, (a) for electron it will be along –z axis. (b) for a positive charge (proton) the force is along +z axis. 111 2024-25 Charged particles moving in a magnetic field. Interactive demonstration: http://www.phys.hawaii.edu/~teb/optics/java/partmagn/index.html EXAMPLE 4.1  EXAMPLE 4.2 Physics 4.3  MOTION IN A MAGNETIC FIELD We will now consider, in greater detail, the motion of a charge moving in a  magnetic field.  We have learnt  in Mechanics (see Class XI book, Chapter 5) that a force on a particle does work if  the force has a component along (or opposed to) the direction of motion of the particle. In the case of motion of a charge in a magnetic field, the magnetic force is perpendicular to the velocity of the particle. So no work is done and no change in the magnitude of the velocity is produced (though the direction of momentum may be changed). [Notice that this is unlike the force due to an electric field, qE, which can have a component parallel (or antiparallel) to motion and thus can transfer energy in addition to momentum.] We shall consider motion of a charged particle in a uniform magnetic field. First consider the case of v perpendicular to B.  The perpendicular force, q v × B, acts as a centripetal force and produces a circular motion perpendicular to the magnetic field. The particle will describe a circle if v and B are  perpendicular to each other (Fig. 4.5). If velocity has a component along B, this component remains unchanged as the motion along the magnetic field will not be affected by the magnetic field. The motion in a plane perpendicular to B is as before a circular one, thereby producing a helical motion (Fig. 4.6). You have already learnt in earlier classes (See Class XI, Chapter 3) that if r is the radius of the circular path of a particle, then a force of  2 m v / r, acts perpendicular to the path towards the centre of the circle, and is called the  centripetal force. If the FIGURE 4.5 Circular motion velocity v is perpendicular to the magnetic field   B, the  magnetic force is  perpendicular to both v and B and acts like a centripetal force. It has a magnitude q v B. Equating the two expressions for centripetal force, m  2 v /r = q v B, which gives r =  m v / qB (4.5) for the radius of the circle described by the charged particle. The larger the  momentum,  the larger is the radius and bigger the circle described. If ω is the angular frequency, then   v = ω  r. So, ω  = 2π ν =  q B/ m [4.6(a)] which is independent of the velocity or energy . Here ν is the frequency of rotation. The independence of ν from energy has important application in the design of a cyclotron (see Section 4.4.2). The time taken for one revolution is T= 2π/ω FIGURE 4.6 Helical motion ≡ 1/ν. If there is a  component of the velocity 112 parallel to the magnetic field (denoted by v ), it will make the particle || 2024-25 Moving Charges and Magnetism move along the field and the path of the particle would be a helical one (Fig. 4.6). The distance moved along the magnetic field  in one rotation is called pitch p.  Using Eq. [4.6 (a)], we have p =   v T  =  2πm v  / q B [4.6(b)] || || The radius of the circular component of motion is called the radius of the helix. Example  4.3   What is the radius of the path of an electron (mass 9 × 10-31 kg and charge 1.6 × 10–19 C) moving at a speed of 3 ×107 m/s in a magnetic field of 6 × 10–4 T perpendicular to it?  What is its frequency?  Calculate its energy in  keV. ( 1 eV = 1.6 × 10–19 J). Solution Using Eq. (4.5) we find r  = m v / (qB )  = 9 ×10–31 kg × 3 × 107  m s–1 / ( 1.6 × 10–19 C × 6 × 10–4 T ) = 28 × 10–2 m = 28 cm ν = v / (2 πr) = 17×106 s–1   = 17×106  Hz   =17 MHz. E = (½ )mv 2   = (½ ) 9 × 10–31 kg × 9 × 1014 m2/s2  = 40.5 ×10–17 J ≈  4×10–16 J = 2.5 keV. 4.4 MAGNETIC F IELD DUE TO A CURRENT ELEMENT, BIOT-SAVART LAW All magnetic fields that we know are due to currents (or moving charges) and due to intrinsic magnetic moments of particles. Here, we shall study the relation between current and the magnetic field it produces. It is given by the Biot-Savart’s  law. Fig. 4.7 shows a finite conductor XY carrying current I. Consider an infinitesimal element dl of the conductor. The magnetic field dB due to this element is to be determined at a point P which is at a distance r from it. Let θ be the angle between dl and the displacement vector r. According to Biot-Savart’s law, the magnitude of the magnetic field dB is proportional to the current I, the element length |dl|, and inversely proportional to the square of the distance r. Its direction* is perpendicular to the plane containing dl and r . Thus, in vector notation, I d l × r FIGURE 4.7 Illustration of dB ∝ r 3 the Biot-Savart law. The current element I dl µ I d l × r produces a field dB at a 0 = π 3  [4.7(a)] distance r. The ⊗ sign 4 r indicates that the where µ /4π is a constant of proportionality. The above expression field is perpendicular 0 holds when the medium is vacuum. to the plane of this page and directed into it. * The sense of  dl × r is also given by the Right Hand Screw rule : Look at the plane containing vectors dl and r. Imagine moving from the first vector towards second vector. If the movement is anticlockwise, the resultant is towards you. If it is clockwise, the resultant is away from you. 113 2024-25 EXAMPLE 4.3 Physics The magnitude of this field is, µ = 0 I dl sinθ dB 4π 2 [4.7(b)] r where we have used the property of cross-product. Equation [4.7 (a)] constitutes our basic equation for the magnetic field.  The proportionality constant in SI units has the exact value, µ0 = 10 −7 Tm/A 4. ( 4π [ 7 c)] We call µ  the permeability of free space (or vacuum). 0 The Biot-Savart law for the magnetic field has certain similarities, as well as, differences with the Coulomb’s law for the electrostatic field. Some of these are: (i) Both are long range, since both depend inversely on the square of distance from the source to the point of interest. The principle of superposition applies to both fields. [In this connection, note that the magnetic field is linear in the source I dl just as the electrostatic field is linear in its source: the electric charge.] (ii) The electrostatic field is produced by a scalar source, namely, the electric charge. The magnetic field is produced by a vector source I dl. (iii) The electrostatic field is along the displacement vector joining the source and the field point. The magnetic field is perpendicular to the plane containing the displacement vector r and the current element I dl. (iv) There is an angle dependence in the Biot-Savart law which is not present  in the electrostatic case. In Fig. 4.7, the magnetic field at any point in  the direction of dl (the dashed line) is zero. Along this line, θ = 0, sin θ = 0 and from Eq. [4.7(a)], |dB| = 0. There is an interesting  relation between ε , the permittivity of free 0 space; µ , the permeability of free space; and c, the speed of light in vacuum: 0 ε µ ( ε )  µ = 0  1 0 0 4π  =  1 10−7 0  π   ( 4 09 ) 1 = = 9 ×1  (3 ×108 )2 2 c We will discuss this connection further in Chapter 8 on the electromagnetic waves. Since the speed of light in vacuum is constant, the product µ ε  is fixed in magnitude. Choosing the value of either ε  or 0 0 0 µ , fixes the value of the other. In SI units, µ  is fixed to be equal to 0 0 4π × 10–7 in magnitude. Example 4.4 An element ∆l = ∆x ˆi  is placed at the origin and carries a large current I = 10 A (Fig. 4.8). What is the magnetic field on the yaxis at a distance of 0.5 m. ∆x = 1 cm. 114 FIGURE 4.8 2024-25 EXAMPLE 4.4 Moving Charges and Magnetism Solution µ d 0 I dl sin θ | B|= [u 4π r 2  sing Eq. (4.7)] T dl = ∆x = 10−2 m m , I = 10 A,  r = 0.5 m = y, µ 4π = 10−7 0 / A θ = 90° ; sin θ = 1 10−7 2 = ×10 ×10− dB = 4 – × 10 8 T 25 ×10−2 The direction of the field is in the +z-direction. This is so since, d ˆ ˆ ˆ l × ˆ r = ∆x i ×y j = y ∆x (i × j) = y ∆x kˆ We remind you of the following cyclic property of cross-products, ˆi × ˆj = kˆ ; ˆj × kˆ = ˆi ; kˆ × ˆi = ˆj Note that the field is small in magnitude. In the next section, we shall use the Biot-Savart law to calculate the magnetic field due to a circular loop. 4.5 MAGNETIC FIELD ON THE AXIS OF A CIRCULAR CURRENT LOOP In this section, we shall evaluate the magnetic field  due to a circular coil along its axis. The evaluation entails summing up the effect of infinitesimal current elements (I dl) mentioned in the previous section. We assume that the current I is steady and that the evaluation is carried out in free space (i.e., vacuum). Fig. 4.9 depicts a circular loop carrying a steady current I. The loop is placed in the  plane with its centre at the origin O and has a radius R. The x-axis is the axis of the loop. We wish to calculate the magnetic field at the point P on this axis. Let x be the distance of P from the centre O of the loop. Consider a conducting element dl of the loop. This is FIGURE 4.9 Magnetic field on the shown in Fig. 4.9. The magnitude dB of the magnetic axis of a current carrying circular field due to dl is given by the Biot-Savart law [Eq. 4.7(a)], loop of radius R. Shown are the µ I dl × r magnetic field dB (due to a line dB = 0 3 (4.8) element dl ) and its 4π r components along and Now 2 2 2 r  = x  + R  . Further, any element of the loop perpendicular to the axis. will be perpendicular to the displacement vector from the element to the axial point. For example, the element dl in Fig. 4.9 is in the  plane, whereas, the displacement vector r from dl to the axial point P is in the  plane. Hence |dl × r|=r dl. Thus, µ0 Idl dB = 4 x 2 + 2 π ( R ) (4.9) 115 2024-25 EXAMPLE 4.4 Physics The direction of dB is shown in Fig. 4.9. It is perpendicular to the plane formed by dl and r. It has an x-component dB  and a component x perpendicular to x-axis, dB . When the components perpendicular to ⊥ the x-axis are summed over, they cancel out and we obtain a null result. For example, the dB  component due to dl is cancelled by the ⊥ contribution due to the diametrically opposite dl element, shown in Fig. 4.9. Thus, only the x-component survives. The net contribution along x-direction can be obtained by integrating dB   = dB cos θ over the loop. x For Fig. 4.9, R cosθ = 2 2 1/2  (4.10) (x + R ) From Eqs. (4.9) and (4.10), µ0Idl d x = R B 4 (x 2 + R2 )3/2 π The summation of elements dl over the loop yields 2πR, the circumference of the loop. Thus, the magnetic field at P due to entire circular loop is µ 2 B = B ˆi = 0I R ˆ x i (4.11) 2 (x 2 + R2 )3/2 As a special case of the above result, we may obtain the field at the centre of the loop. Here  x = 0, and we obtain, µ0I B = ˆ 0 i (4.12) 2R The magnetic field lines due to a circular wire form closed loops and are shown in Fig. 4.10. The direction of the magnetic field is given by (another) right-hand thumb rule stated below: Curl the palm of your right hand around the circular wire with the fingers pointing in the direction of the current. The right-hand thumb gives the direction of the magnetic field. FIGURE 4.10 The magnetic field lines for a current loop. The direction of the field is given by the right-hand thumb rule described in the text. The upper side of the loop may be thought of as the north pole and the lower 116 side as the south pole of a magnet. 2024-25 Moving Charges and Magnetism Example 4.5 A straight wire carrying a current of 12 A is bent into a semi-circular arc of radius 2.0 cm as shown in Fig. 4.11(a). Consider the magnetic field B at the centre of the arc. (a) What is the magnetic field due to the straight segments? (b) In what way the contribution to B from the semicircle differs from that of a circular loop and in what way does it resemble? (c) Would your answer be different if the wire were bent into a semi-circular arc of the same radius but in the opposite way as shown in Fig. 4.11(b)? FIGURE 4.11 Solution (a) dl and r for each element of the straight segments are parallel. Therefore, dl × r = 0. Straight segments do not contribute to |B|. (b) For all segments of the semicircular arc, dl × r are all parallel to each other (into the plane of the paper). All such contributions add up in magnitude. Hence direction of B for a semicircular arc is given by the right-hand rule and magnitude is half that of a circular loop. Thus B is 1.9 × 10–4 T normal to the plane of the paper going into it. (c) Same magnitude of B but opposite in direction to that in (b). Example 4.6 Consider a tightly wound 100 turn coil of radius 10 cm, carrying a current of 1 A. What is the magnitude of the magnetic field at the centre of the coil? Solution Since the coil is tightly wound, we may take each circular element to have the same radius R = 10 cm = 0.1 m. The number of turns N = 100. The magnitude of the magnetic field is, µ NI 4π ×10–7 2 0 ×10 ×1 B = = –1 = π × 6 4 0−4 2 1 R 2 ×10 2 = .28 ×10− T 4.6  AMPERE’S CIRCUITAL LAW There is an alternative and appealing way in which the Biot-Savart law may be expressed. Ampere’s circuital law considers an open surface with a boundary (Fig. 4.12). The surface has current passing through it. We consider the boundary to be made up of a number of small line elements. Consider one such element of length dl. We take the value of the tangential component of the magnetic field, B , at this element and multiply it by the FIGURE 4.12 117 t 2024-25 EXAMPLE 4.5  EXAMPLE 4.6 Physics length of that element dl [Note: B dl=B.d l]. All such t products are added together. We consider the limit as the lengths of elements get smaller and their number gets larger. The sum then tends to an integral. Ampere’s   law states that this integral is  equal to µ  times the total 0 current passing through  the surface,  i.e., “B.dl = µ I [4.13(a)] 0 where I  is the total current through the surface. The integral is taken over the closed loop coinciding with the boundary C of the surface. The relation above involves a sign-convention, given by the right-hand rule. Let the fingers of the right-hand be curled in the sense the boundary is traversed in the loop integral “B.dl. Then the direction of the thumb gives the sense in which the Andre Ampere (1775 – current I  is regarded as positive. 1836) Andre Marie Ampere was a French physicist, For several applications, a much simplified version of mathematician and chemist Eq. [4.13(a)] proves sufficient. We shall assume that, in who founded the science of such cases, it is possible to choose the loop (called electrodynamics. Ampere an amperian loop) such that at each point of the was a child prodigy loop, either who mastered advanced (i) B is tangential to the loop and is a non-zero constant mathematics by the age of B, or 12. Ampere grasped the significance of Oersted’s (ii) B is normal to the loop, or discovery. He carried out a (iii) B vanishes. large series of experiments Now, let L be the length (part) of the  loop for which B to explore the relationship is tangential. Let I   be the current enclosed by the loop. between current electricity e Then, Eq. (4.13) reduces to, and magnetism. These investigations culminated BL =µ I [4.13(b)] 0 e in 1827 with the When there is a system with a symmetry such as for publication of the a straight infinite current-carrying wire in Fig. 4.13, the ‘Mathematical Theory of Electrodynamic Pheno- Ampere’s law enables an easy evaluation of the magnetic mena Deduced Solely from field, much the same way Gauss’ law helps in Experiments’. He hypo- determination of the electric field. This is exhibited in the thesised that all magnetic Example 4.8 below. The boundary of the loop chosen is phenomena are due to a circle and magnetic field is tangential to the circulating electric circumference of the circle. The law gives, for the left hand currents. Ampere was side of Eq. [4.13 (b)], B. 2πr. We find that the magnetic humble and absent- field at a distance r outside the wire is tangential and minded. He once forgot an given by invitation to dine with the Emperor Napoleon. He died B × 2πr  =  µ I, 0 of pneumonia at the age of 61. His gravestone bears B = µ  I/ (2πr) (4.14) 0 the epitaph: Tandem Felix The above result for the infinite wire  is interesting (Happy at last). from several points of view. (i) It implies that the field at every point on a circle of radius r, (with the wire along the axis), is same in 118 magnitude. In other words, the magnetic field 2024-25 ANDRE AMPERE (1775 –1836) Moving Charges and Magnetism possesses what is called a cylindrical symmetry. The field that normally can depend on three coordinates depends only on one: r. Whenever there is symmetry, the solutions simplify. (ii) The field direction at any point on this circle is tangential to it. Thus, the lines of constant magnitude of magnetic field form concentric circles. Notice now, in Fig. 4.1(c), the iron filings form concentric circles. These lines called magnetic field lines form closed loops. This is unlike the electrostatic field lines which originate from positive charges and end at negative charges. The expression for the magnetic field of a straight wire provides a theoretical justification to Oersted’s experiments. (iii) Another interesting point to note is that even though the wire is infinite, the field due to it at a non-zero distance is not infinite. It tends to blow up only when we come very close to the wire. The field is directly proportional to the current and inversely proportional to the distance from the (infinitely long) current source. (iv) There exists a simple rule to determine the direction of the magnetic field due to a long wire. This rule, called the right-hand rule*, is: Grasp the wire in your right hand with your extended thumb pointing in the direction of the current. Your fingers will curl around in the direction of the magnetic field. Ampere’s circuital law is not new in content from Biot-Savart law. Both relate the magnetic field and the current, and both express the same physical consequences of a steady electrical current. Ampere’s law is to Biot-Savart law, what Gauss’s law is to Coulomb’s law. Both, Ampere’s and Gauss’s law relate a physical quantity on the periphery or boundary (magnetic or electric field) to another physical quantity, namely, the source, in the interior (current or charge). We also note that Ampere’s circuital law holds for steady currents which do not fluctuate with time. The following example will help us understand what is meant by the term enclosed current. Example 4.7 Figure 4.13 shows a long straight wire of a circular cross-section (radius a) carrying steady current I. The current I is uniformly distributed across this cross-section. Calculate the magnetic field in the region r < a and r > a. FIGURE 4.13 * Note that there are two distinct right-hand rules: One which gives the direction of B on the axis of current-loop and the other which gives direction of B for a straight conducting wire. Fingers and thumb play different roles in 119 the two. 2024-25 EXAMPLE 4.7 Physics Solution (a) Consider the case r > a . The Amperian loop, labelled 2, is a circle concentric with the cross-section. For this loop, L  = 2 π r I  = Current enclosed by the loop = I e The result is the familiar expression for a long straight wire B (2π r) = µ I 0 µ I 0 B = [4.15(a)] 2 π r ∝ 1 B (r > a) r Now the current enclosed I  is not I, but is less than this value. e Since the current distribution is uniform, the current enclosed is,   I = π 2 r 2 Ir I e  π 2  = a  2 a 2 I r Using Ampere’s law, B (2 πr ) = µ 0 2 a  µ I 0 B =  2  r