Chapter One ELECTRIC CHARGES AND FIELDS 1.1  INTRODUCTION All of us have the experience of seeing a spark or hearing a crackle when we take off our synthetic clothes or sweater, particularly in dry weather. Have you ever tried to find any explanation for this phenomenon? Another common example of electric discharge is the lightning that we see in the sky during thunderstorms. We also experience a sensation of an electric shock either while opening the door of a car or holding the iron bar of a bus after sliding from our seat. The reason for these experiences is discharge of electric charges through our body, which were accumulated due to rubbing of insulating surfaces. You might have also heard that this is due to generation of static electricity. This is precisely the topic we are going to discuss in this and the next chapter. Static means anything that does not move or change with time. Electrostatics deals with the study of forces, fields and potentials arising from static charges. 1.2  ELECTRIC CHARGE Historically the credit of discovery of the fact that amber rubbed with wool or silk cloth attracts light objects goes to Thales of Miletus, Greece, around 600 BC. The name electricity is coined from the Greek word 2024-25 Physics FIGURE 1.1 Rods: like charges repel and unlike charges attract each other. elektron meaning amber. Many such pairs of materials were known which on rubbing could attract light objects like straw, pith balls and bits of papers. It was observed that if two glass rods rubbed with wool or silk cloth are brought close to each other, they repel each other [Fig. 1.1(a)]. The two strands of wool or two pieces of silk cloth, with which the rods were rubbed, also repel each other. However, the glass rod and wool attracted each other. Similarly, two plastic rods rubbed with cat’s fur repelled each other [Fig. 1.1(b)] but attracted the fur. On the other hand, the plastic rod attracts the glass rod [Fig. 1.1(c)] and repel the silk or wool with which the glass rod is rubbed. The glass rod repels the fur. These seemingly simple facts  were established from years of efforts and careful experiments and their analyses. It was concluded, after many careful studies by different scientists, that there were only two kinds of an entry which is called the electric charge. We say that the bodies like glass or plastic rods, silk, fur and pith balls are electrified. They acquire an electric charge on rubbing. There are two kinds of electrification and we find  that (i) like charges repel and (ii) unlike charges attract each other. The property which differentiates the two kinds of charges is called the polarity of charge. When a glass rod is rubbed with silk, the rod acquires one kind of charge and the silk acquires the second kind of charge. This is true for any pair of objects that are rubbed to be electrified. Now if the electrified glass rod is brought in contact with silk, with which it was rubbed, they no longer attract each other. They also do not attract or repel other light objects as they did on being electrified. Thus, the charges acquired after rubbing are lost when the charged bodies are brought in contact. What can you conclude from these observations? It just tells us that unlike charges acquired by the objects neutralise or nullify each other’s effect. Therefore, the charges were named as positive and negative by the American scientist Benjamin Franklin. By convention, the charge on glass rod or cat’s fur is called positive and that on plastic rod or silk is termed negative. If an object possesses an electric charge, it is said to be electrified or charged. When it has no charge it is said to be electrically neutral. 2 2024-25 Electric Charges and Fields A simple apparatus to detect charge on a body is the gold-leaf electroscope [Fig. 1.2(a)]. It consists of a vertical metal rod housed in a box, with two thin gold leaves attached to its bottom end. When a charged object touches the metal knob at the top of the rod, charge flows on to the leaves and they diverge. The degree of divergance is an indicator of the amount of charge. Try to understand why material bodies acquire charge. You know that all matter is made up of atoms and/or molecules. Although normally the materials are electrically neutral,  they do contain charges; but their charges are exactly balanced. Forces that hold the molecules together, forces that hold atoms together in a solid, the adhesive force of glue, forces associated with surface tension, all are basically electrical in nature, arising from the forces between charged particles. Thus the electric force is all pervasive and it encompasses almost each and every field associated with our life. It is therefore essential that we learn more about such a force. To electrify a neutral body, we need to add or remove one kind of charge. When we say that a body is charged, we always refer to this excess charge or deficit of charge. In solids,  some of the electrons, being less tightly bound in the atom, are the charges which are transferred from one body to the other.  A body can thus be charged positively by losing some of its electrons. Similarly, a body can be charged negatively by gaining electrons. When we rub a glass rod with silk, some of the electrons from the rod are transferred to the silk cloth. Thus the rod gets positively charged and the silk gets negatively charged. No new charge is created in the process of rubbing. Also the number of electrons, that are transferred, is a very small fraction of the total number of electrons in the material body. 1.3  CONDUCTORS AND INSULATORS Some substances readily allow passage of electricity through them, others do not.  Those which allow electricity to pass through them easily are called conductors. They have electric charges (electrons) that are comparatively free to move inside the material. Metals, human and animal bodies and earth are conductors. Most of the non-metals like glass, porcelain, plastic, nylon, wood offer high resistance to the passage of electricity through them. They are called insulators. Most  substances fall into one of the two classes stated above*. When some charge is transferred to a conductor, it readily gets distributed over the entire surface of the conductor. In contrast, if some charge is put on an insulator, it stays at the same place. You will learn why this happens in the next chapter. This property of the materials tells you why a nylon or plastic comb gets electrified on combing dry hair or on rubbing, but a metal article * There is a third category called semiconductors, which offer resistance to the movement of charges which is intermediate between the conductors and insulators. 3 2024-25 Physics like spoon does not. The charges on metal leak through our body to the ground as both are conductors of electricity. However, if a metal rod with a wooden or plastic handle is rubbed without touching its metal part, it shows signs of charging. 1.4  BASIC PROPERTIES OF ELECTRIC CHARGE We have seen that there are two types of charges, namely positive and negative and their effects tend to cancel each other. Here,  we shall now describe some other properties of the electric charge. If the sizes of charged bodies are very small as compared to the distances between them, we treat them as point charges. All the charge content of the body is assumed to be concentrated at one point in space. 1.4.1  Additivity of charges FIGURE 1.2 Electroscopes: (a) We have not as yet given a quantitative definition of a The gold leaf electroscope, (b) charge; we shall follow it up in the next section. We shall Schematics of a simple tentatively assume that this can be done and proceed. If electroscope. a system contains two point charges q1 and q2, the total charge of the system is obtained simply by adding algebraically q1 and q2 , i.e., charges add up like real numbers or they are scalars like the mass of a body. If a system contains n charges q1, q2, q3, …, qn, then the total charge of the system is q1 + q2 + q3 + … + qn .  Charge has  magnitude but no direction, similar to mass. However, there is one difference between mass and charge. Mass of a body is always positive whereas a charge can be either positive or negative. Proper signs have to be used while adding the charges in a system. For example, the total charge of a system containing five charges +1, +2, –3, +4 and –5, in some arbitrary unit, is (+1) + (+2) + (–3) + (+4) + (–5) = –1 in the same unit. 1.4.2  Charge is conserved We have already  hinted to the fact that when bodies are charged by rubbing, there is transfer of electrons from one body to the other; no new charges are either created or destroyed. A picture of particles of electric charge enables us to understand the idea of conservation of charge. When we rub two bodies, what one body gains in charge the other body loses. Within an isolated system consisting of many charged bodies, due to interactions among the bodies, charges may get redistributed but it is found that the total charge of the isolated system is always conserved. Conservation of charge has been established experimentally. It is not possible to create or destroy net charge carried by any isolated system although the charge carrying particles may be created or destroyed 4 2024-25 Electric Charges and Fields in a process. Sometimes nature creates charged particles: a neutron turns into a proton and an electron. The proton and electron thus created have equal and opposite charges and the total charge is zero before and after the creation. 1.4.3  Quantisation of charge Experimentally it is established that all free charges are integral multiples of a basic unit of charge denoted by e. Thus charge q on a body is always given by q = ne where n is any integer, positive or negative. This basic unit of charge is the charge that an electron or proton carries. By convention, the charge on an electron is taken to be negative; therefore charge on an electron is written as –e and that on a proton as +e. The fact that electric charge is always an integral multiple of e is termed as quantisation of charge. There are a large number of situations in physics where certain physical quantities are quantised. The quantisation of charge was first suggested by the experimental laws of electrolysis discovered by English experimentalist Faraday. It was experimentally demonstrated by Millikan in 1912. In the International System (SI) of Units, a unit of charge is called a coulomb and is denoted by the symbol C. A coulomb is defined in terms the unit of the electric current which you are going to learn in a subsequent chapter. In terms of this definition, one coulomb is the charge flowing through a wire in 1 s if the current is 1 A (ampere), (see Chapter 1 of Class XI, Physics Textbook , Part I). In this system, the value of the basic unit of charge is e = 1.602192 × 10–19 C Thus, there are about 6 × 1018 electrons in a charge of  –1C. In electrostatics, charges of this large magnitude are seldom encountered and hence we use smaller units 1 mC (micro coulomb) = 10–6 C or 1 mC (milli coulomb) = 10–3 C. If the protons and electrons are the only basic charges in the universe, all the observable charges have to be integral multiples of e. Thus, if a body contains n1 electrons and n2 protons, the total amount of charge on the body is n2 × e + n1 × (–e) = (n2 – n1) e. Since n1 and n2 are integers, their difference is also an integer. Thus the charge on any body is always an integral multiple of e and can be increased or decreased also in steps of e. The step size e is, however, very small because at the macroscopic level, we deal with charges of a few mC. At this scale the fact that charge of a body can increase or decrease in units of e is not visible. In this respect, the grainy nature of the charge is lost and it appears to be continuous. This situation can be compared with the geometrical concepts of points and lines. A dotted line viewed from a distance appears continuous to us but is not continuous in reality. As many points very close to 5 2024-25 Physics each other normally give an impression of a continuous line, many small charges taken together appear as a continuous charge distribution. At the macroscopic level, one deals with charges that are enormous compared to the magnitude of charge e. Since e = 1.6 × 10–19 C, a charge of magnituOde, say 1 mC, contains something like 1013 times the electronic charge. At this scale, the fact that charge can increase or decrease only in units of e is not very different from saying that charge can take continuous values. Thus, at the macroscopic level, the quantisation of charge has no practical consequence and can be ignored. However, at the microscopic level, where the charges involved are of the order of a few tens or hundreds of e, i.e., they can be counted, they appear in discrete lumps and quantisation of charge cannot be ignored. It is the magnitude of scale involved that is very important. Example 1.1 If 109 electrons move out of a body to another body every second, how much time is required to get a total charge of 1 C on the other body? Solution In one second 109 electrons move out of the body. Therefore the charge given out in one second is 1.6 × 10–19 × 109 C = 1.6 × 10–10 C. The time required to accumulate a charge of 1 C can then be estimated to be 1 C ÷ (1.6 × 10–10 C/s) = 6.25 × 109 s = 6.25 × 109 ÷ (365  × 24 × 3600) years = 198 years. Thus to collect a charge of one coulomb, from a body from which 109 electrons move out every second, we will need approximately 200 years. One coulomb is, therefore, a very large unit for many practical purposes. It is, however, also important to know what is roughly the number of electrons contained in a piece of one cubic centimetre of a material. A cubic piece of copper of side 1 cm contains about 2.5 × 1024 electrons. Example 1.2 How much positive and negative charge is there in a cup of water? Solution Let us assume that the mass of one cup of water is 250 g. The molecular mass of water is 18g. Thus, one mole (= 6.02 × 1023 molecules) of water is 18 g. Therefore the number of molecules in one cup of water is (250/18) × 6.02 × 1023. Each molecule of water contains two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom, i.e., 10 electrons and 10 protons. Hence the total positive and total negative charge has the same magnitude. It is equal to (250/18) × 6.02 × 1023 × 10 × 1.6 × 10–19 C = 1.34 × 107 C. 1.5  COULOMB’S LAW Coulomb’s law is a quantitative statement about the force between two point charges. When the linear size of charged bodies are much smaller than the distance separating them, the size may be ignored and the charged bodies are treated as point charges. Coulomb measured the force between two point charges and found that it varied inversely as the square of the distance between the charges and was directly 6 proportional to the product of the magnitude of the two charges and 2024-25 EXAMPLE 1.2  EXAMPLE 1.1 Electric Charges and Fields acted along the line joining the two charges. Thus, if two point charges q1, q2 are separated by a distance r in vacuum, the magnitude of the force (F) between them is given by q q F = k 1 2 (1. ) r 2 1 How did Coulomb arrive at this law from his experiments? Coulomb used a torsion balance*  for measuring the force between two charged metallic spheres. When the separation between two spheres is much larger than the radius of each sphere, the charged spheres may be regarded as point charges. However, the charges on the spheres were unknown, to begin with. How then could he discover a relation like Eq. (1.1)? Coulomb thought of the following simple way: Suppose the Charles Augustin de charge on a metallic sphere is q. If the sphere is put in contact Coulomb (1736 – 1806) Coulomb, a French with an identical uncharged sphere, the charge will spread over physicist, began his the two spheres. By symmetry, the charge on each sphere will career as a military be q/2*. Repeating this process, we can get charges q/2, q/4, engineer in the West etc. Coulomb varied the distance for a fixed pair of charges and Indies. In 1776, he measured the force for different separations. He then varied the returned to Paris and charges in pairs, keeping the distance fixed for each pair. retired to a small estate Comparing forces for different pairs of charges at different to do his scientific distances, Coulomb arrived at the relation, Eq. (1.1). research. He invented a Coulomb’s law, a simple mathematical statement,  was torsion balance to initially experimentally arrived at  in the manner described measure the quantity of above. While the original experiments established it at a a force and used it for macroscopic scale, it has also been established down to determination of forces of electric attraction or subatomic level  (r ~ 10–10 m). repulsion between small Coulomb discovered his law without knowing the explicit charged spheres. He magnitude of the charge. In fact, it is the other way round: thus arrived in 1785 at Coulomb’s law can now be employed to furnish a definition the inverse square law for a unit of charge. In the relation, Eq. (1.1), k is so far relation, now known as arbitrary. We can choose any positive value of k. The choice Coulomb’s law. The law of k determines the size of the unit of charge. In SI units, the had been anticipated by Nm2 Priestley and also by value of k is about 9 × 109  h  n t o  h r e C2 . T e u i  f c a g  that Cavendish earlier, results from this choice is called a coulomb which we defined though Cavendish never published his earlier in Section 1.4. Putting this value of k in Eq. (1.1), we results. Coulomb also see that for q1 = q2 = 1 C, r = 1 m found the inverse F = 9 × 109 N square law of force That is, 1 C is the charge that when placed at a distance between unlike and like of 1 m from another charge of the same magnitude in vacuum magnetic poles. experiences an electrical force of repulsion of magnitude * A torsion balance is a sensitive device to measure force. It was also used later by Cavendish to measure the very feeble gravitational force between two objects, to verify Newton’s Law of Gravitation. * Implicit in this is the assumption of additivity of charges and conservation: two charges (q/2 each) add up to make a total charge q. 7 2024-25 CHARLES AUGUSTIN DE COULOMB  (1736 –1806) Physics 9 × 109 N. One coulomb is evidently too big a unit to be used. In practice, in electrostatics, one uses smaller units like 1 mC or 1 mC. The constant k in Eq. (1.1) is usually put as k = 1/4pe0 for later convenience, so that Coulomb’s law is written as 1 q q F = 1 2 4 π ε 1. ) r 2 ( 2 0 e0 is called the permittivity of free space . The value of e0 in SI units is  = 8.854 × 10–12 C2 N–1m–2 0 Since force is a vector, it is better to write Coulomb’s law in the vector notation. Let the position vectors of charges q1 and q2 be r1 and r2 respectively [see Fig.1.3(a)]. We denote force on q1 due to q2 by FIGURE 1.3 (a) Geometry and F (b) Forces between charges. 12 and force on q2 due to q1 by F21. The two point charges q1 and q2 have been numbered 1 and 2 for convenience and the vector leading from 1 to 2 is denoted by r21: r21 = r2 – r1 In the same way, the vector leading from 2 to 1 is denoted by r12: r12 = r1 – r2 = – r21 The magnitude of the vectors r21 and r12 is denoted by r21 and r12, respectively (r12 = r21). The direction of a vector is specified by a unit vector along the vector. To denote the direction from 1 to 2 (or from 2 to 1), we define the unit vectors: ɵ 21 21 = r r r r 12 12 = , r 1 − 2 r , ɵ ɵ ɵ 2 r 1 21 r12 Coulomb’s force law between two point charges q1 and q2 located at r1 and r2, respectively is then expressed as 1 q q F 1 2 ɵ 21 = r 4 2 21 π ε (1.3) o r21 Some remarks on Eq. (1.3) are relevant: · Equation (1.3) is valid for any sign of q1 and q2 whether positive or negative. If q1 and q2 are of the same sign (either both positive or both negative), F21 is along r̂ 21, which denotes repulsion, as it should be for like charges. If q1 and q2 are of opposite signs, F21 is along – rɵ 21(= rɵ 12), which denotes attraction, as expected for unlike charges. Thus, we do not have to write separate equations for the cases of like and unlike charges. Equation (1.3) takes care of both cases correctly [Fig. 1.3(b)]. 8 2024-25 Electric Charges and Fields · The force F12  on charge q1 due to charge q2, is obtained from Eq. (1.3), by simply interchanging 1 and 2, i.e., 1 q1 q F = 2 12 rˆ12 = −F 4 π ε 2 r 2 1 0 12 Thus, Coulomb’s law agrees with the Newton’s third law. · Coulomb’s law [Eq. (1.3)] gives the force between two charges q1 and q2 in vacuum. If the charges are placed in matter or the intervening space has matter, the situation gets complicated due to the presence of charged constituents of matter. We shall consider electrostatics in matter in the next chapter. Example 1.3 Coulomb’s law for electrostatic force between two point charges and Newton’s law for gravitational force between two stationary point masses, both have inverse-square dependence on the distance between the charges and masses respectively. (a) Compare the strength of these forces by determining the ratio of their magnitudes (i) for an electron and a proton and (ii) for two protons. (b) Estimate the accelerations of electron and proton due to the electrical force of their mutual attraction when they are 1 Å (= 10-10 m) apart? (m  = 1.67 × p 10–27 kg, m  = 9.11 × 10–31 kg) e Solution (a) (i) The electric force between an electron and a proton at a distance r apart is: 1 e2 Fe = − 4πε 2 0 r where the negative sign indicates that the force is attractive. The corresponding gravitational force (always attractive) is: mp me FG = −G r 2 where m  and m  are the masses of a proton and an electron p e respectively. F 2 e = e = 2.4 ×1039 FG 4πε0Gm pme (ii) On similar lines, the ratio of the magnitudes of electric force to the gravitational force between two protons at a distance r apart is: Fe e2 = =  1.3 × 1036 FG 4πε0Gm pm p However, it may be mentioned here that the signs of the two forces are different. For two protons,  the gravitational force is attractive in nature and the Coulomb force is repulsive. The actual values of these forces between two protons inside a nucleus (distance between two protons is ~ 10-15 m inside a nucleus) are Fe ~ 230 N, whereas, FG ~ 1.9 × 10–34 N. The (dimensionless) ratio of the two forces shows that electrical forces are enormously stronger than the gravitational forces. 9 2024-25 Interactive animation on Coulomb’s law: http://webphysics.davidson.edu/physlet_resources/bu_semester2/menu_semester2.html EXAMPLE 1.3 Physics (b) The electric force F exerted by a proton on an electron is same in magnitude to the force exerted by an electron on a proton; however, the masses of an electron and a proton are different. Thus, the magnitude of force is 1 e2 |F| = 4π 2  = 8.987 × 109 Nm2/C2 × (1.6 ×10–19C)2 / (10–10m)2 ε 0 r = 2.3 × 10–8 N Using Newton’s second law of motion, F = ma, the acceleration that an electron will undergo is a = 2.3×10–8 N / 9.11 ×10–31 kg = 2.5 × 1022 m/s2 Comparing this with the value of acceleration due to gravity, we can conclude that the effect of gravitational field is negligible on the motion of electron and it undergoes very large accelerations under the action of Coulomb force due to a proton. The value for acceleration of the proton is 2.3 × 10–8 N / 1.67 × 10–27 kg = 1.4 × 1019 m/s2 Example 1.4 A charged metallic sphere A is suspended by a nylon thread. Another charged metallic sphere B held by an insulating 10 FIGURE 1.4 2024-25 EXAMPLE 1.4  EXAMPLE 1.3 Electric Charges and Fields handle is brought close to A such that the distance between their centres is 10 cm, as shown in Fig. 1.4(a). The resulting repulsion of A is noted (for example, by shining a beam of light and measuring the deflection of its shadow on a screen). Spheres A and B are touched by uncharged spheres C and D respectively, as shown in Fig. 1.4(b). C and D are then removed and B is brought closer to A to a distance of 5.0 cm between their centres, as shown in Fig. 1.4(c). What is the expected repulsion of A on the basis of Coulomb’s law? Spheres A and C and spheres B and D have identical sizes. Ignore the sizes of A and B in comparison to the separation between their centres. Solution Let the original charge on sphere A be q and that on B be q¢. At a distance r between their centres, the magnitude of the electrostatic force on each is given by F = 1 qq ′ 4π 2 ε0 r neglecting the sizes of spheres A and B in comparison to r. When an identical but uncharged sphere C touches A, the charges redistribute on A and C and, by symmetry, each sphere carries a charge q/2. Similarly, after D touches B, the redistributed charge on each is q¢/2. Now, if the separation between A and B is halved, the magnitude of the electrostatic force on each is 1 (q /2)(q /2) = 1 (qq ′) F ′ = ′ = F 4πε0 (r /2)2 4π 2 ε0 r Thus the electrostatic force on A, due to B, remains unaltered. 1.6  FORCES BETWEEN MULTIPLE CHARGES The mutual electric force between two charges is given by Coulomb’s law. How to calculate the force on a charge where there are not one but several charges around? Consider a system of n stationary charges q1, q2, q3, ..., q  in vacuum. n What is the force on q1 due to q2, q3, ..., q ? Coulomb’s law is n not enough to answer this question.  Recall that forces of mechanical origin add according to the parallelogram law of addition. Is the same true for forces of electrostatic origin? Experimentally, it is verified that force on any charge due to a number of other charges is the vector sum of all the forces on that charge due to the other charges, taken one at a time. The individual forces are unaffected due to the presence of other charges. This is termed as the principle of superposition. To better understand the concept, consider a system of three charges q1, q2 and q3, as shown in Fig. 1.5(a). The force on one charge, say q1, due to two other charges q2, q3 can therefore be obtained by performing a vector addition of the forces due to each one of these charges. Thus, if the force on q1 due to q2 is denoted by F12, F12 is given by Eq. (1.3)  even though other charges are present. FIGURE 1.5 A system of (a) three charges Thus, F 11 12 = 1 q1q2 r̂ 4π 2 12 (b) multiple charges. ε0 r12 2024-25 EXAMPLE 1.4 Physics In the same way, the force on q1 due to q3, denoted by F13, is given by 1 q F 1q3 13 = rˆ 4π 2 13 ε0 r13 which again is the Coulomb force on q1 due to q3, even though other charge q2 is present. Thus the total force F1 on q1 due to the two charges q2 and q3 is given as 1 F F F 1 2 1 q r 1q= + = q q ˆ + 3 1 12 13 rˆ 4π 2 12 2 13 ε0 r12 4π (1.4) ε0 r13 The above calculation of force can be generalised to a system of charges more than three, as shown in Fig. 1.5(b). The principle of superposition says that in a system of charges q1, q2, ..., q , the force on q1 due to q2 is the same as given by Coulomb’s law, n i.e., it is unaffected by the presence of the other charges q3, q4, ..., q . The n total force F1 on the charge q1, due to all other charges, is then given by the vector sum of the forces F12, F13, ...,  F1 : n i.e., 1 q q q q q1q  F1  =  F12  + F13  + ...+  F1n = ˆ ˆ + . + π  1 2 2 r12 + 1 3 r 2 r13 .. n rˆ 4 1n  ε  r r 2 0 12 13 1n  n q = q1 ∑ i r̂ 4π 2 1i ε (1.5) 0 i =2 r1i The vector sum is obtained as usual by the parallelogram law of addition of vectors. All of electrostatics is basically a consequence of Coulomb’s law and the superposition principle. Example 1.5 Consider three charges q1, q2, q3 each equal to q at the vertices of an equilateral triangle of side l. What is the force on a charge Q (with the same sign as q) placed at the centroid of the triangle, as shown in Fig. 1.6? FIGURE 1.6 Solution In the given equilateral triangle ABC of sides of length l, if we draw a perpendicular AD to the side BC, AD = AC cos 30º = ( 3 /2 ) l  and the distance AO of the centroid O 12 from A is (2/3) AD = (1/ 3 ) l. By symmatry AO = BO = CO. 2024-25 EXAMPLE 1.5 Electric Charges and Fields Thus, 3 Qq Force F  on Q due to charge q at A  =  along 1 4π 2  AO ε0 l 3 Qq Force F on Q due to charge q at B  = 2 4π 2  along BO ε0 l 3 Qq Force F on Q due to charge q at C  = 4π 2  along CO 3 ε0 l 3 Qq The resultant of forces F  and F  is l 3 4π 2  a ong OA, by the 2 ε0 l 3 Qq parallelogram law. Therefore, the total force on Q = (rˆ − rˆ 4π 2 ) ε0 l = 0, where r̂ is the unit vector along OA. It is clear also by symmetry that the three forces will sum to zero. Suppose that the resultant force was non-zero but in some direction. Consider what would happen if the system was rotated through 60° about O. Example 1.6 Consider the charges q, q, and –q placed at the vertices of an equilateral triangle, as shown in Fig. 1.7. What is the force on each charge? FIGURE 1.7 Solution  The forces acting on charge q at A due to charges q at B and –q at C are F12 along BA and F13 along AC respectively, as shown in Fig. 1.7. By the parallelogram law, the total force F1 on the charge q at A is given by F1 = F r1̂ where r1̂ is a unit vector along BC. The force of attraction or repulsion for each pair of charges has the 2 same magnitude F = q 4 π 2 ε0 l The total force F2 on charge q at B is thus F  = F r̂ 2, where r̂ 2 is a 2 unit vector along AC. 13 2024-25 EXAMPLE 1.5  EXAMPLE 1.6 Physics Similarly the total force on charge –q at C is F3  = 3  F n̂ , where n̂ is the unit vector along the direction bisecting the ÐBCA. It is interesting to see that the sum of the forces on the three charges is zero, i.e., F1 + F2 + F3 = 0 The result is not at all surprising. It follows straight from the fact that Coulomb’s law is consistent with Newton’s third law. The proof is left to you as an exercise. 1.7  ELECTRIC FIELD Let us consider a point charge Q placed in vacuum, at the origin O. If we place another point charge q at a point P, where OP = r, then the charge Q will exert a force on q as per Coulomb’s law. We may ask the question: If charge q is removed, then what is left in the surrounding? Is there nothing? If there is nothing at the point P, then how does a force act when we place the charge q at P. In order to answer such questions, the early scientists introduced the concept of field. According to this, we say that the charge Q produces an electric field everywhere in the surrounding. When another charge q is brought at some point P, the field there acts on it and produces a force. The electric field produced by the charge Q  at a point r is given as E (r) 1 Q 1 Q = rˆ = rˆ 4π 2 2 ε0 r 4π (1.6) ε0 r where rˆ =  r/r, is a unit vector from the origin to the point r. Thus, Eq.(1.6) specifies the value of the electric field for each value of the position vector r. The word “field” signifies how some distributed quantity (which could be a scalar or a vector) varies with position. The effect of the charge has been incorporated in the existence of the electric field. We obtain the force F exerted by a charge Q on a charge q, as 1 Qq F = rˆ 4π 2 (1.7) ε0 r Note that the charge q also exerts an equal and opposite force on the charge Q. The electrostatic force between the charges Q and q can be looked upon as an interaction between charge q and the electric field of Q and vice versa. If we denote the position of charge q by the vector r, it experiences a force F equal to the charge q multiplied by the electric field E at the location of q. Thus, F(r) = q E(r) (1.8) Equation (1.8) defines the SI unit of electric field as N/C*. Some important remarks may be made here: (i) From Eq. (1.8), we can infer that if q is unity, the electric field due to FIGURE 1.8 Electric a charge Q is numerically equal to the force exerted by it. Thus, the field (a) due to a electric field due to a charge Q at a point in space may be defined charge Q, (b) due to a as the force that a unit positive charge would experience if placed charge –Q. 14 * An alternate unit V/m will be introduced in the next chapter. 2024-25 EXAMPLE 1.6 Electric Charges and Fields at that point. The charge Q, which is producing the electric field, is called a source charge and the charge q, which tests the effect of a source charge, is called a test charge. Note that the source charge Q must remain at its original location. However, if a charge q is brought at any point around Q, Q itself is bound to experience an electrical force due to q and will tend to move. A way out of this difficulty is to make q negligibly small. The force F is then negligibly small but the ratio F/q is finite and defines the electric field:  E = F  lim (1 9 q→0  . ) q  A practical way to get around the problem (of keeping Q undisturbed in the presence of q) is to hold Q to its location by unspecified forces! This may look strange but actually this is what happens in practice. When we are considering the electric force on a test charge q due to a charged planar sheet (Section 1.14), the charges on the sheet are held to their locations by the forces due to the unspecified charged constituents inside the sheet. (ii) Note that the electric field E due to Q, though defined operationally in terms of some test charge q, is independent of q. This is because F is proportional to q, so the ratio F/q does not depend on q. The force F on the charge q due to the charge Q depends on the particular location of charge q which may take any value in the space around the charge Q. Thus, the electric field E due to Q is also dependent on the space coordinate r. For different positions of the charge q all over the space, we get different values of electric field E. The field exists at every point in three-dimensional space. (iii) For a positive charge, the electric field will be directed radially outwards from the charge. On the other hand, if the source charge is negative, the electric field vector, at each point, points radially inwards. (iv) Since the magnitude of the force F on charge q due to charge Q depends only on the distance r of the charge q from charge Q, the magnitude of the electric field E will also depend only on the distance r. Thus at equal distances from the charge Q, the magnitude of its electric field E is same. The magnitude of electric field E due to a point charge is thus same on a sphere with the point charge at its centre; in other words, it has a spherical symmetry.