Chapter Nine RAY OPTICS AND OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS 9.1  INTRODUCTION Nature has endowed the human eye (retina) with the sensitivity to detect electromagnetic waves within a small range of the electromagnetic spectrum. Electromagnetic radiation belonging to this region of the spectrum (wavelength of about 400 nm to 750 nm) is called light. It is mainly through light and the sense of vision that we know and interpret the world around us. There are two things that we can intuitively mention about light from common experience. First, that it travels with enormous speed and second, that it travels in a straight line. It took some time for people to realise that the speed of light is finite and measurable. Its presently accepted value in vacuum is c = 2.99792458 × 108 m s–1.  For many purposes, it suffices to take c = 3 × 108 m s–1. The speed of light in vacuum is the highest speed attainable in nature. The intuitive notion that light travels in a straight line seems to contradict what we have learnt in Chapter 8, that light is an electromagnetic wave of wavelength belonging to the visible part of the spectrum. How to reconcile the two facts? The answer is that the wavelength of light is very small compared to the size of ordinary objects that we encounter commonly (generally of the order of a few cm or larger). In this situation, as you will learn in Chapter 10, a light wave can be considered to travel from one point to another, along a straight line joining 2024-25 Physics them. The path is called a ray of light, and a bundle of such rays constitutes a beam of light. In this chapter, we consider the phenomena of reflection, refraction and dispersion of light, using the ray picture of light. Using the basic laws of reflection and refraction, we shall study the image formation by plane and spherical reflecting and refracting surfaces. We then go on to describe the construction and working of some important optical instruments, including the human eye. 9.2  REFLECTION OF LIGHT BY SPHERICAL MIRRORS We are familiar with the laws of reflection. The angle of reflection (i.e., the angle between reflected ray and the normal to the reflecting surface or the mirror) equals the angle of incidence (angle between incident ray and the normal). Also that the incident ray, reflected ray and the normal to the reflecting surface at the point of incidence lie in the same plane (Fig. 9.1). These laws are valid at each point on any reflecting surface whether plane or curved. However, we shall restrict our discussion to the special case of curved surfaces, FIGURE 9.1 The incident ray, reflected ray that is, spherical surfaces. The normal in this case and the normal to the reflecting surface lie is to be taken as normal to the tangent to surface in the same plane. at the point of incidence. That is, the normal is along the radius, the line joining the centre of curvature of the mirror to the point of incidence. We have already studied that the geometric centre of a spherical mirror is called its pole while that of a spherical lens is called its optical centre. The line joining the pole and the centre of curvature of the spherical mirror is known as the principal axis. In the case of spherical lenses, the principal axis is the line joining the optical centre with its principal focus as you will see later. 9.2.1  Sign convention To derive the relevant formulae for reflection by spherical mirrors and refraction by spherical lenses, we must first adopt a sign convention for measuring distances. In this book, we shall follow the Cartesian sign convention. According to this convention, all distances are measured from the pole of the mirror or the optical centre of the lens. The distances measured in the same direction as the incident light are taken as positive and FIGURE 9.2  The Cartesian Sign Convention. those measured in the direction opposite to the direction of incident light are taken as negative (Fig. 9.2). 222 The heights measured upwards with respect to x-axis and normal to the 2024-25 Ray Optics and Optical Instruments principal axis (x-axis) of the mirror/lens are taken as positive (Fig. 9.2). The heights measured downwards are taken as negative. With a common accepted convention, it turns out that a single formula for spherical mirrors and a single formula for spherical lenses can handle all different cases. 9.2.2  Focal length of spherical mirrors Figure 9.3 shows what happens when a parallel beam of light is incident on (a) a concave mirror, and (b) a convex mirror. We assume that the rays are paraxial, i.e., they are incident at points close to the pole P of the mirror and make small angles with the principal axis. The reflected rays converge at a point F on the principal axis of a concave mirror [Fig. 9.3(a)]. For a convex mirror, the reflected rays appear to diverge from a point F on its principal axis [Fig. 9.3(b)]. The point F is called the principal focus of the mirror. If the parallel paraxial beam of light were incident, making some angle with the principal axis, the reflected rays would converge (or appear to diverge) from a point in a plane through F normal to the principal axis. This is called the focal plane of the mirror [Fig. 9.3(c)]. FIGURE 9.3  Focus of a concave and convex mirror. The distance between the focus F and the pole P of the mirror is called the focal length of the mirror, denoted by f. We now show that f = R/2, where R is the radius of curvature of the mirror. The geometry of reflection of an incident ray is shown in Fig. 9.4. Let C be the centre of curvature of the mirror. Consider a ray parallel to the principal axis striking the mirror at M. Then CM will be perpendicular to the mirror at M. Let q be the angle of incidence, and MD 223 2024-25 Physics be the perpendicular from M on the principal axis. Then, ÐMCP = q and ÐMFP = 2q Now, MD MD tanq =  and tan 2q = (9.1) CD FD For small q, which is true for paraxial rays, tanq  » q, tan 2q » 2q.  Therefore, Eq. (9.1) gives MD MD = 2 FD CD CD or, FD = (9.2) 2 Now, for small q, the point D is very close to the point P. Therefore, FD = f and CD = R. Equation (9.2) then gives f = R/2 (9.3) 9.2.3  The mirror equation If rays emanating from a point actually meet at another point FIGURE 9.4 Geometry of after reflection and/or refraction, that point is called the image reflection of an incident ray on of the first point. The image is real if the rays actually converge (a) concave spherical mirror, to the point; it is virtual if the rays do not actually meet but and (b) convex spherical mirror. appear to diverge from the point when produced backwards. An image is thus a point-to-point correspondence with the object established through reflection and/or refraction. In principle, we can take any two rays emanating from a point on an object, trace their paths, find their point of intersection and thus, obtain the image of the point due to reflection at a spherical mirror. In practice, however, it is convenient to choose any two of the following rays: (i) The ray from the point which is parallel to the principal axis. The reflected ray goes through the focus of the mirror. (ii) The ray passing through the centre of curvature of a concave mirror or appearing to FIGURE 9.5 Ray diagram for image formation by a concave mirror. pass through it for a convex mirror. The reflected ray simply retraces the path. (iii) The ray passing through (or directed towards) the focus of the concave mirror or appearing to pass through (or directed towards) the focus of a convex mirror. The reflected ray is parallel to the principal axis. (iv) The ray incident at any angle at the pole. The reflected ray follows laws of reflection. Figure 9.5 shows the ray diagram considering three rays. It shows the image A¢B¢ (in this case, real) of an object AB formed by a concave mirror. It does not mean that only three rays emanate from the point A. An infinite number of rays emanate from any source, in all directions. Thus, point A¢ is image point of A if every ray originating at point A and 224 falling on the concave mirror after reflection passes through the point A¢. 2024-25 Ray Optics and Optical Instruments We now derive the mirror equation or the relation between the object distance (u), image distance (v) and the focal length ( f ). From Fig. 9.5, the two right-angled triangles A¢B¢F and MPF are similar. (For paraxial rays, MP can be considered to be a straight line perpendicular to CP.) Therefore, B′A ′ = B′F PM FP B′A ′ = B′F or  (∵PM = AB) (9.4) BA FP Since Ð APB = Ð A¢PB¢, the right angled triangles A¢B¢P and ABP are also similar. Therefore, B′A ′ = B′ P (9.5) B A BP Comparing Eqs. (9.4) and (9.5), we get B′F = B′P – FP = B′P (9.6) FP FP BP Equation (9.6) is a relation involving magnitude of distances. We now apply the sign convention. We note that light travels from the object to the mirror MPN. Hence this is taken as the positive direction. To reach the object AB, image A¢B¢ as well as the focus F from the pole P, we have to travel opposite to the direction of incident light. Hence, all the three will have negative signs. Thus, B¢ P = –v, FP = –f, BP = –u Using these in Eq. (9.6), we get – v + f – v = – f –u v – f v or = f u v = + v 1 f u Dividing it by v, we get 1 1 1 + = v u f (9.7) This relation is known as the mirror equation. The size of the image relative to the size of the object is another important quantity to consider. We define linear magnification (m ) as the ratio of the height of the image (h¢) to the height of the object (h): h ′ m = (9.8) h h and h¢ will be taken positive or negative in accordance with the accepted sign convention. In triangles A¢B¢P and ABP, we have, B′A ′ = B′P BA BP With the sign convention, this becomes 225 2024-25 Physics – h ′ – v = h –u so that h ′ v m = = – (9.9) h u We have derived here the mirror equation, Eq. (9.7), and the magnification formula, Eq. (9.9), for the case of real, inverted image formed by a concave mirror. With the proper use of sign convention, these are, in fact, valid for all the cases of reflection by a spherical mirror (concave or convex) whether the image formed is real or virtual. Figure 9.6 shows the ray diagrams for virtual image formed by a concave and convex mirror. You should verify that Eqs. (9.7) and (9.9) are valid for these cases as well. FIGURE 9.6  Image formation by (a) a concave mirror with object between P and F, and (b) a convex mirror. Example 9.1 Suppose that the lower half of the concave mirror’s reflecting surface in Fig. 9.6 is covered with an opaque (non-reflective) material. What effect will this have on the image of an object placed in front of the mirror? Solution You may think that the image will now show only half of the object, but taking the laws of reflection to be true for all points of the remaining part of the mirror, the image will be that of the whole object. However, as the area of the reflecting surface has been reduced, the intensity of the image will be low (in this case, half). Example 9.2 A mobile phone lies along the principal axis of a concave mirror, as shown in Fig. 9.7. Show by suitable diagram, the formation of its image. Explain why the magnification is not uniform. Will the distortion of image depend on the location of the phone with respect to the mirror? 226 FIGURE 9.7 2024-25 EXAMPLE 9.2  EXAMPLE 9.1 Ray Optics and Optical Instruments Solution The ray diagram for the formation of the image of the phone is shown in Fig. 9.7. The image of the part which is on the plane perpendicular to principal axis will be on the same plane. It will be of the same size, i.e., B¢C = BC. You can yourself realise why the image is distorted. Example 9.3 An object is placed at (i) 10 cm, (ii) 5 cm in front of a concave mirror of radius of curvature 15 cm. Find the position, nature, and magnification of the image in each case. Solution The focal length f = –15/2 cm = –7.5 cm (i) The object distance u = –10 cm. Then Eq. (9.7) gives 1 1 1 + = v –10 –7.5 10 × 7.5 or v= −  = – 30 cm 2.5 The image is 30 cm from the mirror on the same side as the object. v (−30) Also, magnification m = – = – = – 3 u (−10) The image is magnified, real and inverted. (ii) The object distance u = –5 cm. Then from Eq. (9.7), 1 + 1 = 1 v −5 −7.5 5 × 7.5 or  v= ( 15 cm 7.5 –5) = This image is formed at 15 cm behind the mirror. It is a virtual image. v 15 Magnification m = – = – = 3 u (−5) The image is magnified, virtual and erect. Example 9.4  Suppose while sitting in a parked car, you notice a jogger approaching towards you in the side view mirror of R = 2 m.  If the jogger is running at a speed of 5 m s–1, how fast the image of the jogger appear to move when the jogger is (a) 39 m, (b) 29 m, (c) 19 m, and (d) 9 m away. Solution From the mirror equation, Eq. (9.7), we get fu v = u − f For convex mirror, since R = 2 m, f = 1 m. Then for u = –39 m, = (−39) ×1 = 39 v m −39 −1 40 Since the jogger moves at a constant speed of 5 m s–1, after 1 s the position of the image v (for u = –39 + 5 = –34) is (34/35 )m. 227 2024-25 EXAMPLE 9.2  EXAMPLE 9.3  EXAMPLE 9.4 Physics The shift in the position of image in 1 s is 39 − 34 = 1365 −1360 = 5 = 1 m 40 35 1400 1400 280 Therefore, the average speed of the image when the jogger is between 39 m and 34 m from the mirror, is (1/280) m s–1 Similarly, it can be seen that for u = –29 m,  –19 m and –9 m, the speed with which the image appears to move is 1 m s–1 1 m –1 1 , s and m s–1 ,  respectively. 150 60 10 Although the jogger has been moving with a constant speed, the speed of his/her image appears to increase substantially as he/she moves closer to the mirror. This phenomenon can be noticed by any person sitting in a stationary car or a bus. In case of moving vehicles, a similar phenomenon could be observed if the vehicle in the rear is moving closer with a constant speed. 9.3  REFRACTION When a beam of light encounters another transparent medium, a part of light gets reflected back into the first medium while the rest enters the other. A ray of light represents a beam. The direction of propagation of an obliquely incident (0°< i < 90°) ray of light that enters the other medium, changes at the interface of the two media. This phenomenon is called refraction of light. Snell experimentally obtained the following laws of refraction: (i) The incident ray, the refracted ray and the normal to the interface at the point of incidence, all lie in the same plane. (ii) The ratio of the sine of the angle of incidence to the sine of angle of refraction is constant. Remember that the angles of incidence (i ) and refraction (r ) are the angles that the incident and  its refracted ray make with the normal, respectively. We have sin i = n 21 (9.10) sinr where n  is a constant, called the refractive 21 index of the second medium with respect to the FIGURE 9.8 Refraction and reflection of light. first medium. Equation (9.10) is the well-known Snell’s law of refraction. We note that n  is a 21 characteristic of the pair of media (and also depends on the wavelength of light), but is independent of the angle of incidence. From Eq. (9.10), if n  > 1, r < i , i.e., the refracted ray bends towards 21 the normal. In such a case medium 2 is said to be optically denser (or 228 denser, in short) than medium 1. On the other hand, if n  <1, r > i, the 21 2024-25 EXAMPLE 9.4 Ray Optics and Optical Instruments refracted ray bends away from the normal. This is the case when incident ray in a denser medium refracts into a rarer medium. Note: Optical density should not be confused with mass density, which is mass per unit volume. It is possible that mass density of an optically denser medium may be less than that of an optically rarer medium (optical density is the ratio of the speed of light in two media). For example, FIGURE 9.9  Lateral shift of a ray refracted turpentine and water. Mass density of through a parallel-sided slab. turpentine is less than that of water but its optical density is higher. If n  is the refractive index of medium 2 with 21 respect to medium 1 and n  the refractive index 12 of medium 1 with respect to medium 2, then it should be clear that 1 n12 = (9.11) n21 It also follows that if n  is the refractive index 32 of medium 3 with respect to medium 2 then n  = 32 n  ×  n , where  n  is the refractive index  of 31 12 31 medium 3 with respect to medium 1. Some elementary results based on the laws of refraction follow immediately. For a rectangular slab, refraction takes place at two interfaces (airglass and glass-air). It is easily seen from Fig. 9.9 that r  = i , i.e., the emergent ray is parallel to the 2 1 incident ray—there is no deviation, but it does suffer lateral displacement/shift with respect to the incident ray. Another familiar observation is that FIGURE 9.10  Apparent depth for the bottom of a tank filled with water appears to be (a) normal, and (b) oblique viewing. raised (Fig. 9.10). For viewing near the normal direction, it can be shown that the apparent depth (h ) is real depth (h ) divided by the refractive 1 2 index of the medium (water). 9.4  TOTAL INTERNAL REFLECTION When light travels from an optically denser medium to a rarer medium at the interface, it is partly reflected back into the same medium and partly refracted to the second medium. This reflection is called the internal reflection. When a ray of light enters from a denser medium to a rarer medium, it bends away from the normal, for example, the ray AO B in Fig. 9.11. 1 The incident ray AO  is partially reflected (O C) and partially transmitted 1 1 (O B) or refracted, the angle of refraction (r ) being larger than the angle of 1 incidence (i ). As the angle of incidence increases, so does the angle of 229 2024-25 Physics refraction, till for the ray AO , the angle of 3 refraction is p/2. The refracted ray is bent so much away from the normal that it grazes the surface at the interface between the two media. This is shown by the ray AO D in Fig. 9.11. If the angle of incidence 3 is increased still further (e.g., the ray AO ), 4 refraction is not possible, and the incident ray is totally reflected. This is called total internal reflection. When light gets reflected by a surface, normally some FIGURE 9.11   Refraction and internal reflection fraction of it gets transmitted. The of rays from a point A in the denser medium reflected ray, therefore, is always less (water) incident at different angles at the interface intense than the incident ray, howsoever with a rarer medium (air). smooth the reflecting surface may be. In total internal reflection, on the other hand, no transmission of light takes place. The angle of incidence corresponding to an angle of refraction 90°, say ÐAO N, is called the critical angle (i  ) for the given pair of media.   We 3 c see from Snell’s law [Eq. (9.10)] that if the relative refractive index of the refracting medium is less than one then, since the maximum value of sin r is unity, there is an upper limit to the value of sin i for which the law can be satisfied, that is, i = i  such that c sin i   = n (9.12) c 21 For values of i larger than i , Snell’s law of refraction cannot be c satisfied, and hence no refraction is possible. The refractive index of denser medium 1 with respect to rarer medium 2 will be n  = 1/sin i . Some typical critical angles are listed in Table 9.1. 12 c TABLE 9.1 CRITICAL ANGLE OF SOME TRANSPARENT MEDIA WITH RESPECT TO AIR Substance medium Refractive index Critical angle Water 1.33 48.75 Crown glass 1.52 41.14 Dense flint glass 1.62 37.31 Diamond 2.42 24.41 A demonstration for total internal reflection All optical phenomena can be demonstrated very easily with the use of a laser torch or pointer, which is easily available nowadays. Take a glass beaker with clear water in it. Add a few drops of milk or any other suspension to water and stir so that water becomes a little turbid. Take a laser pointer and shine its beam through the turbid water. You will find that the path of the beam inside the water shines brightly. 230 2024-25 Ray Optics and Optical Instruments Shine the beam from below the beaker such that it strikes at the upper water surface at the other end. Do you find that it undergoes partial reflection (which is seen as a spot on the table below) and partial refraction [which comes out in the air and is seen as a spot on the roof; Fig. 9.12(a)]? Now direct the laser beam from one side of the beaker such that it strikes the upper surface of water more obliquely [Fig. 9.12(b)]. Adjust the direction of laser beam until you find the angle for which the refraction above the water surface is totally absent and the beam is totally reflected back to water. This is total internal reflection at its simplest. Pour this water in a long test tube and shine the laser light from top, as shown in Fig. 9.12(c). Adjust the direction of the laser beam such that it is totally internally reflected every time it strikes the walls of the tube. This is similar to what happens in optical fibres. Take care not to look into the laser beam directly and not to point it at anybody’s face. 9.4.1 Total internal reflection in nature and its technelogical applications (i) Prism : Prisms designed to bend light by 90° or by 180° make use of total internal reflection [Fig. 9.13(a) and (b)]. Such a prism is also used to invert images without chxanging their size [Fig. 9.13(c)]. In the first two cases, the critical angle i  for the material of the prism c FIGURE 9.12 must be less than 45°. We see from Table 9.1 that this is true for both Observing total internal crown glass and dense flint glass. reflection in water with (ii) Optical fibres: Nowadays optical fibres are extensively used for a laser beam (refraction transmitting audio and video signals through long distances. Optical due to glass of beaker fibres too make use of the phenomenon of total internal reflection. neglected being very Optical fibres are fabricated with high quality composite glass/quartz thin). fibres. Each fibre consists of a core and cladding. The refractive index of the material of the core is higher than that of the cladding. When a signal in the form of light is directed at one end of the fibre at a suitable angle, it undergoes repeated total internal reflections along the length of the fibre and finally comes out at the other end (Fig. 9.14). Since light undergoes total internal reflection at each stage, there is no appreciable loss in the intensity of the light signal. Optical fibres are fabricated such that light reflected at one side of inner surface strikes the other at an angle larger than the critical angle. Even if the fibre is bent, light can easily travel along its length. Thus, an optical fibre can be used to act as an optical pipe. FIGURE 9.13 Prisms designed to bend rays by A bundle of optical fibres can be put to 90° and 180° or to invert image without changing several uses. Optical fibres are extensively its size make use of total internal reflection. used for transmitting and receiving 231 2024-25 Physics electrical signals which are converted to light by suitable transducers. Obviously, optical fibres can also be used for transmission of optical signals. For example, these are used as a ‘light pipe’ to facilitate visual examination of internal organs like esophagus, stomach and intestines. You might have seen a commonly available decorative lamp with fine FIGURE 9.14 Light undergoes successive total plastic fibres with their free ends forming a internal reflections as it moves through an fountain like structure. The other end of the optical fibre. fibres is fixed over an electric lamp. When the lamp is switched on, the light travels from the bottom of each fibre and appears at the tip of its free end as a dot of light. The fibres in such decorative lamps are optical fibres. The main requirement in fabricating optical fibres is that there should be very little absorption of light as it travels for long distances inside them. This has been achieved by purification and special preparation of materials such as quartz. In silica glass fibres, it is possible to transmit more than 95% of the light over a fibre length of 1 km. (Compare with what you expect for a block of ordinary window glass 1 km thick.) 9.5 REFRACTION AT SPHERICAL SURFACES AND BY LENSES We have so far considered refraction at a plane interface. We shall now consider refraction at a spherical interface between two transparent media. An infinitesimal part of a spherical surface can be regarded as planar and the same laws of refraction can be applied at every point on the surface. Just as for reflection by a spherical mirror, the normal at the point of incidence is perpendicular to the tangent plane to the spherical surface at that point and, therefore, passes through its centre of curvature. We first consider refraction by a single spherical surface and follow it by thin lenses. A thin lens is a transparent optical medium bounded by two surfaces; at least one of which should be spherical. Applying the formula for image formation by a single spherical surface successively at the two surfaces of a lens, we shall obtain the lens maker’s formula and then the lens formula. 9.5.1  Refraction at a spherical surface Figure 9.15 shows the geometry of formation of image I of an object O on the principal axis of a spherical surface with centre of curvature C, and radius of curvature R. The rays are incident from a medium of refractive index n , to another of refractive index n . As before, we take the aperture 1 2 (or the lateral size) of the surface to be small compared to other distances involved, so that small angle approximation can be made. In particular, NM will be taken to be nearly equal to the length of the perpendicular from the point N on the principal axis. We have, for small angles, MN 232 tan ÐNOM = OM 2024-25 Ray Optics and Optical Instruments MN tan ÐNCM = MC MN tan ÐNIM  = MI Now, for DNOC, i is the exterior angle. Therefore, i = ÐNOM + ÐNCM MN i = + MN (9.13) OM MC Similarly, FIGURE 9.15  Refraction at a spherical r = ÐNCM – ÐNIM surface separating two media. MN i.e., r = − MN (9.14) MC MI Now, by Snell’s law n  sin i = n  sin r 1 2 or for small angles n i = n r 1 2 Substituting i and r from Eqs. (9.13) and (9.14), we get n1 n2 n2 −n + = 1 (9.15) OM MI MC Here, OM, MI and MC represent magnitudes of distances. Applying the Cartesian sign convention, OM = –u, MI = +v, MC = +R Substituting these in Eq. (9.15), we get n2 n1 n2 −n − = 1 (9.16) v u R Equation (9.16) gives us a relation between object and image distance in terms of refractive index of the medium and the radius of curvature of the curved spherical surface. It holds for any curved spherical surface. Example 9.5 Light from a point source in air falls on a spherical glass surface (n = 1.5 and radius of curvature = 20 cm). The distance of the light source from the glass surface is 100 cm. At what position the image is formed? Solution We use the relation given by Eq. (9.16). Here u = – 100 cm, v = ?, R = + 20 cm, n  = 1, and n  = 1.5. 1 2 We then have 1.5 1 0.5 + = v 100 20 or   v = +100 cm The image is formed at a distance of 100 cm from the glass surface, in the direction of incident light. 233 2024-25 EXAMPLE 9.5 Physics 9.5.2  Refraction by a lens Figure 9.16(a) shows the geometry of image formation by a double convex lens. The image formation can be seen in terms of two steps: (i) The first refracting surface forms the image I  of the object O 1 [Fig. 9.16(b)]. The image I  acts as a virtual object for the second surface 1 that forms the image at I [Fig. 9.16(c)]. Applying Eq. (9.15) to the first interface ABC, we get n1 n2 n2 n1   (9.17) OB BI1 BC1 A similar procedure applied to the second interface* ADC gives, n2 n1 n2 n1    (9.18) DI1 DI DC2 For a thin lens, BI  = DI . Adding 1 1 Eqs. (9.17) and (9.18), we get n n   1 + 1 = (n − 1 1 2 n1 ) + OB DI  BC1 DC2  (9.19) Suppose the object is at infinity, i.e., OB ® ¥ and DI = f, Eq. (9.19) gives n  1 = 1 1  (n2 −n1 ) + f  (9.2 BC1 DC  0) 2 The point where image of an object placed at infinity is formed is called the focus F, of the lens and the distance f gives its focal length. A lens has two foci, F and F¢, on either side of it (Fig. 9.17). By the sign convention, BC  = + R , 1 1 DC  = –R 2 2 So Eq. (9.20) can be written as (9.21) Equation (9.21) is known as the lens maker’s formula. It is useful to design lenses of desired focal length using surfaces FIGURE 9.16  (a) The position of object, and the of suitable radii of curvature. Note that the image formed by a double convex lens, formula is true for a concave lens also. In (b) Refraction at the first spherical surface and that case R is negative, R  positive and (c) Refraction at the second spherical surface. 1 2 therefore, f is negative. * Note that now the refractive index of the medium on the right side of ADC is n 1 while on its left it is n . Further DI  is negative as the distance is measured