Chapter Three CURRENT ELECTRICITY 3.1  INTRODUCTION In Chapter 1, all charges whether free or bound, were considered to be at rest. Charges in motion constitute an electric current. Such currents occur naturally in many situations. Lightning is one such phenomenon in which charges flow from the clouds to the earth through the atmosphere, sometimes with disastrous results. The flow of charges in lightning is not steady, but in our everyday life we see many devices where charges flow in a steady manner, like water flowing smoothly in a river. A torch and a cell-driven clock are examples of such devices. In the present chapter, we shall study some of the basic laws concerning steady electric currents. 3.2  ELECTRIC CURRENT Imagine a small area held normal to the direction of flow of charges. Both the positive and the negative charges may flow forward and backward across the area. In a given time interval t, let q  be the net amount (i.e., + forward minus backward) of positive charge that flows in the forward direction across the area. Similarly, let q  be the net amount of negative – charge flowing across the area in the forward direction. The net amount of charge flowing across the area in the forward direction in the time interval t, then, is q = q – q . This is proportional to t for steady current + – 2024-25 Physics and the quotient q I = (3.1) t is defined to be the current across the area in the forward direction. (If it turn out to be a negative number, it implies a current in the backward direction.) Currents are not always steady and hence more generally, we define the current as follows. Let DQ be the net charge flowing across a crosssection of a conductor during the time interval Dt [i.e., between times t and (t + Dt)]. Then, the current at time t across the cross-section of the conductor is defined as the value of the ratio of DQ to Dt in the limit of Dt tending to zero, ( ) ∆Q I t ≡ lim (3.2) ∆t →0 ∆t In SI units, the unit of current is ampere. An ampere is defined through magnetic effects of currents that we will study in the following chapter. An ampere is typically the order of magnitude of currents in domestic appliances. An average lightning carries currents of the order of tens of thousands of amperes and at the other extreme, currents in our nerves are in microamperes. 3.3 ELECTRIC CURRENTS IN CONDUCTORS An electric charge will experience a force if an electric field is applied. If it is free to move, it will thus move contributing to a current. In nature, free charged particles do exist like in upper strata of atmosphere called the ionosphere. However, in atoms and molecules, the negatively charged electrons and the positively charged nuclei are bound to each other and are thus not free to move. Bulk matter is made up of many molecules, a gram of water, for example, contains approximately 1022 molecules. These molecules are so closely packed that the electrons are no longer attached to individual nuclei. In some materials, the electrons will still be bound, i.e., they will not accelerate even if an electric field is applied. In other materials, notably metals, some of the electrons are practically free to move within the bulk material. These materials, generally called conductors, develop electric currents in them when an electric field is applied. If we consider solid conductors, then of course the atoms are tightly bound to each other so that the current is carried by the negatively charged electrons. There are, however, other types of conductors like electrolytic solutions where positive and negative charges both can move. In our discussions, we will focus only on solid conductors so that the current is carried by the negatively charged electrons in the background of fixed positive ions. Consider first the case when no electric field is present. The electrons will be moving due to thermal motion during which they collide with the fixed ions. An electron colliding with an ion emerges with the same speed as before the collision. However, the direction of its velocity after the collision is completely random. At a given time, there is no preferential 82 direction for the velocities of the electrons. Thus on the average, the 2024-25 Current Electricity number of electrons travelling in any direction will be equal to the number of electrons travelling in the opposite direction. So, there will be no net electric current. Let us now see what happens to such a piece of conductor if an electric field is applied. To focus our thoughts, imagine the conductor in the shape of a cylinder of radius R (Fig. 3.1). Suppose we now take two thin circular discs FIGURE 3.1 Charges +Q and –Q put at the ends of a dielectric of the same radius and put of a metallic cylinder. The electrons will drift positive charge +Q distributed over one disc because of the electric field created to and similarly –Q at the other disc. We attach neutralise the charges. The current thus the two discs on the two flat surfaces of the will stop after a while unless the charges +Q cylinder. An electric field will be created and and –Q are continuously replenished. is directed from the positive towards the negative charge. The electrons will be accelerated due to this field towards +Q. They will thus move to neutralise the charges. The electrons, as long as they are moving, will constitute an electric current. Hence in the situation considered, there will be a current for a very short while and no current thereafter. We can also imagine a mechanism where the ends of the cylinder are supplied with fresh charges to make up for any charges neutralised by electrons moving inside the conductor. In that case, there will be a steady electric field in the body of the conductor. This will result in a continuous current rather than a current for a short period of time. Mechanisms, which maintain a steady electric field are cells or batteries that we shall study  later in this chapter. In the next sections, we shall study the steady current that results from a steady electric field in conductors. 3.4  OHM’S LAW A basic law regarding flow of currents was discovered by G.S. Ohm in 1828, long before the physical mechanism responsible for flow of currents was discovered. Imagine a conductor through which a current I is flowing and let V be the potential difference between the ends of the conductor. Then Ohm’s law states that V µ I or, V = R I (3.3) where the constant of proportionality R is called the resistance of the conductor. The SI units of resistance is ohm, and is denoted by the symbol W. The resistance R not only depends on the material of the conductor but also on the dimensions of the conductor. The dependence of R on the dimensions of the conductor can easily be determined as follows. FIGURE 3.2 Consider a conductor satisfying Eq. (3.3) to be in the form of a slab of Illustrating the length l and cross sectional area A [Fig. 3.2(a)]. Imagine placing two such relation R = rl/A for identical slabs side by side [Fig. 3.2(b)], so that the length of the a rectangular slab combination is 2l. The current flowing through the  combination is the of length l and area of cross-section A. same as that flowing through either of the slabs. If V is the potential difference across the ends of the first slab, then V is also the potential difference across the ends of the second slab since the second slab is 83 2024-25 Physics identical to the first and the same current I flows through both. The potential difference across the ends of the combination is clearly sum of the potential difference across the two individual slabs and hence equals 2V. The current through the combination is I and the resistance of the combination R  is [from Eq. (3.3)], C 2V RC = = 2R (3.4) I since V/I = R, the resistance of either of the slabs. Thus, doubling the length of a conductor doubles the resistance. In general, then resistance is proportional to length, R ∝l (3.5) Georg Simon Ohm  (1787– Next, imagine dividing the slab into two by cutting it 1854) German physicist, lengthwise so that the slab can be considered as a professor at Munich. Ohm combination of two identical slabs of length l , but each was led to his law by an having a cross sectional  area of A/2 [Fig. 3.2(c)]. analogy between the For a given voltage V across the slab, if I is the current conduction of heat: the electric field is analogous to through the entire slab, then clearly the current flowing the temperature gradient, through each of the two half-slabs is I/2. Since the and the electric current is potential difference across the ends of the half-slabs is V, analogous to the heat flow. i.e., the same as across the full slab, the resistance of each of the half-slabs R  is 1 = V V R1 = 2 = 2R. (3.6) (I /2) I Thus, halving the area of the cross-section of a conductor doubles the resistance. In general, then the resistance R is inversely proportional to the cross-sectional area, 1 R ∝ (3.7) A Combining Eqs. (3.5) and (3.7), we have l R ∝ (3.8) A and hence for a given conductor l R = ρ (3.9) A where the constant of proportionality r depends on the material of the conductor but not on its dimensions. r is called resistivity. Using the last equation, Ohm’s law reads = × = Iρl V I R (3.10) A Current per unit area (taken normal to the current), I/A, is called current density and is denoted by j. The SI units of the current density are A/m2. Further, if E is the magnitude of uniform electric field in the conductor whose length is l, then the potential difference V across its 84 ends is El. Using these, the last equation reads 2024-25 GEORG SIMON OHM (1787–1854) Current Electricity E l = j r l or,    E = j r (3.11) The above relation for magnitudes E and j can indeed be cast in a vector  form. The current density, (which we have defined as the current through unit area normal to the current) is also directed along E, and is also a vector j (º j E/E). Thus, the last equation can be written as, E = jr (3.12) or,   j = s E (3.13) where s º1/r is called the conductivity. Ohm’s law is often stated in an equivalent form, Eq. (3.13) in addition to Eq.(3.3). In the next section, we will try to understand the origin of the Ohm’s law as arising from the characteristics of the drift of electrons. 3.5 DRIFT OF ELECTRONS AND THE ORIGIN OF RESISTIVITY As remarked before, an electron will suffer collisions with the heavy fixed ions, but after collision, it will emerge with the same speed but in random directions. If we consider all the electrons, their average velocity will be zero since their directions are random. Thus, if there are N electrons and the velocity of the ith electron (i = 1, 2, 3, ... N ) at a given time is v , then i 1 N ∑ vi = 0 N (3.14) i =1 Consider now the situation when an electric field is present. Electrons will be accelerated due to this field by –e E a = (3.15) m where –e is the charge and m is the mass of an electron. Consider again the ith electron at a given time t. This electron would have had its last collision some time before t, and let t  be the time elapsed after its last i collision. If v  was its velocity immediately after the last i collision, then its velocity V  at time t is i = +  −eE Vi vi   t (3.1 ) m  i 6 FIGURE 3.3 A schematic picture of since starting with its last collision it was accelerated an electron moving from a point A to (Fig. 3.3) with an acceleration given by Eq. (3.15) for a another point B through repeated time interval t . The average velocity of the electrons at collisions, and straight line travel i time t is the average of all the V ’s. The average of v ’s is between collisions (full lines). If an i i zero [Eq. (3.14)] since immediately after any collision, electric field is applied as shown, the electron ends up at point B¢ (dotted the direction of the velocity of an electron is completely lines). A slight drift in a direction random. The collisions of the electrons do not occur at opposite the electric field is visible. regular intervals but at random times. Let us denote by t, the average time between successive collisions. Then 85 at a given time, some of the electrons would have spent 2024-25 Physics time more than t and some less than t. In other words, the time t  in i Eq. (3.16) will be less than t for some and more than t for others as we go through the values of i = 1, 2 ..... N. The average value of t  then is t i (known as relaxation time). Thus, averaging Eq. (3.16) over the N-electrons at any given time t gives us for the average velocity v d ≡ ( ) = ( ) − eE vd Vi v (t ) average i average i m average e E e E = 0 – τ = − τ (3.17) m m This last result is surprising. It tells us that the electrons move with an average velocity which is independent of time, although electrons are accelerated. This is the phenomenon of drift and the velocity v  in Eq. (3.17) is called the drift velocity. d Because of the drift, there will be net transport of charges across any area perpendicular to E. Consider a planar area A, located inside the conductor such that FIGURE 3.4 Current in a metallic the normal to the area is parallel to E (Fig. 3.4). Then conductor. The magnitude of current because of the drift, in an infinitesimal amount of time density in a metal is the magnitude of Dt, all electrons to the left of the area at distances upto charge contained in a cylinder of unit |v |Dt would have crossed the area. If n is the number d area and length v . d of free electrons per unit volume in the metal, then there are n Dt |v |A such electrons. Since each d electron carries a charge –e, the total charge transported across this area A to the right in time Dt is –ne A|v |Dt. E is directed towards the left and d hence the total charge transported along E across the area is negative of this. The amount of charge crossing the area A in time Dt is by definition [Eq. (3.2)] I Dt, where I is the magnitude of the current. Hence, I ∆t = + n e A vd ∆t (3.18) Substituting the value of |v | from Eq. (3.17) d 2 ∆ = e A I t τ n ∆t E (3.19) m By definition I is related to the magnitude |j| of the current density by I = |j|A (3.20) Hence, from Eqs.(3.19) and (3.20), 2 j = ne τ E (3.21) m The vector j is parallel to E and hence we can write Eq. (3.21) in the vector form j= ne2 τE (3.22) m Comparison with Eq. (3.13) shows that Eq. (3.22) is exactly the Ohm’s 86 law, if we identify the conductivity s  as 2024-25 Current Electricity 2 σ = ne τ (3.23) m We thus see that a very simple picture of electrical conduction reproduces Ohm’s law. We have, of course, made assumptions that t and n are constants, independent of E. We shall, in the next section, discuss the limitations of Ohm’s law. Example 3.1 (a) Estimate the average drift speed of conduction electrons in a copper wire of cross-sectional area 1.0 × 10–7 m2 carrying a current of 1.5 A. Assume that each copper atom contributes roughly one conduction electron. The density of copper is 9.0 × 103 kg/m3, and its atomic mass is 63.5 u. (b) Compare the drift speed obtained above with, (i) thermal speeds of copper atoms at ordinary temperatures, (ii) speed of propagation of electric field along the conductor which causes the drift motion. Solution (a) The direction of drift velocity of conduction electrons is opposite to the electric field direction, i.e., electrons drift in the direction of increasing potential. The drift speed v  is given by Eq. (3.18) d v   = (I/neA) d Now, e = 1.6 × 10–19 C, A = 1.0 × 10–7m2, I = 1.5 A. The density of conduction electrons, n is equal to the number of atoms per cubic metre (assuming one conduction electron per Cu atom as is reasonable from its valence electron count of one). A cubic metre of copper has a mass of 9.0 × 103 kg. Since 6.0 × 1023 copper atoms have a mass of 63.5 g, 6.0 ×1023 n = × 9.0 ×106 63.5 = 8.5 × 1028 m–3 which gives, 1.5 v = d 8.5 ×1028 ×1.6 ×10–19 ×1.0 ×10–7 = 1.1 × 10–3 m s–1  = 1.1 mm s–1 (b) (i) At a temperature T, the thermal speed* of a copper atom of mass M is obtained from [<(1/2) 2 Mv  > = (3/2) k T ] and is thus B typically of the order of kBT/M , where k  is the Boltzmann B constant. For copper at 300 K, this is about 2 × 102 m/s. This figure indicates the random vibrational speeds of copper atoms in a conductor. Note that the drift speed of electrons is much smaller, about 10–5 times the typical thermal speed at ordinary temperatures. (ii) An electric field travelling along the conductor has a speed of an electromagnetic wave, namely equal to 3.0 × 108 m s–1 (You will learn about this in Chapter 8). The drift speed is, in comparison, extremely small; smaller by a factor of 10–11. * See Eq. (12.23) of Chapter 12 from Class XI book. 87 2024-25 EXAMPLE 3.1 Physics Example 3.2 (a) In Example 3.1, the electron drift speed is estimated to be only a few mm s–1 for currents in the range of a few amperes? How then is current established almost the instant a circuit is closed? (b) The electron drift arises due to the force experienced by electrons in the electric field inside the conductor. But force should cause acceleration. Why then do the electrons acquire a steady average drift speed? (c) If the electron drift speed is so small, and the electron’s charge is small, how can we still obtain large amounts of current in a conductor? (d) When electrons drift in a metal from lower to higher potential, does it mean that all the ‘free’ electrons of the metal are moving in the same direction? (e) Are the paths of electrons straight lines between successive collisions (with the positive ions of the metal) in the (i) absence of electric field, (ii) presence of electric field? Solution (a) Electric field is established throughout the circuit, almost instantly (with the speed of light) causing at every point a local electron drift. Establishment of a current does not have to wait for electrons from one end of the conductor travelling to the other end. However, it does take a little while for the current to reach its steady value. (b) Each ‘free’ electron does accelerate, increasing its drift speed until it collides with a positive ion of the metal. It loses its drift speed after collision but starts to accelerate and increases its drift speed again only to suffer a collision again and so on. On the average, therefore, electrons acquire only a drift speed. (c) Simple, because the electron number density is enormous, ~1029 m–3. (d) By no means. The drift velocity is superposed over the large random velocities of electrons. (e) In the absence of electric field, the paths are straight lines; in the presence of electric field, the paths are, in general, curved. 3.5.1  Mobility As we have seen, conductivity arises from mobile charge carriers. In metals, these mobile charge carriers are electrons; in an ionised gas, they are electrons and positive charged ions; in an electrolyte, these can be both positive and negative ions. An important quantity is the mobility m defined as the magnitude of the drift velocity per unit electric field: |v µ | = d (3.24) E The SI unit of mobility is m2/Vs and is 104 of the mobility in practical units (cm2/Vs). Mobility is positive. From Eq. (3.17), we have e τE 88 v  = d m 2024-25 EXAMPLE 3.2 Current Electricity Hence, µ v = d = eτ (3.25) E m where t is the average collision time for electrons. 3.6  LIMITATIONS OF OHM’S LAW Although Ohm’s law has been found valid over a large class of materials, there do exist materials and devices used in electric circuits where the proportionality of V and I does not hold. The deviations broadly are one or more of the following FIGURE 3.5 The dashed line types: represents the linear Ohm’s (a) V ceases to be proportional to I (Fig. 3.5). law. The solid line is the voltage (b) The relation between V and I depends on the sign of V. In V versus current I for a good other words, if I is the current for a certain V, then reversing conductor. the direction of V keeping its magnitude fixed, does not produce a current of the same magnitude as I in the opposite direction (Fig. 3.6). This happens, for example, in a diode which we will study in Chapter 14. FIGURE 3.6 Characteristic curve FIGURE 3.7 Variation of current of a diode. Note the different versus voltage for GaAs. scales for negative and positive values of the voltage and current. (c) The relation between V and I is not unique, i.e., there is more than one value of V for the same current I (Fig. 3.7). A material exhibiting such behaviour is GaAs. Materials and devices not obeying Ohm’s law in the form of Eq. (3.3) are actually widely used in electronic circuits. In this and a few subsequent chapters, however, we will study the electrical currents in materials that obey Ohm’s law. 3.7  RESISTIVITY OF VARIOUS MATERIALS The materials are classified as conductors, semiconductors and insulators depending on their resistivities, in an increasing order of their values. 89 2024-25 Physics Metals have low resistivities in the range of 10–8 Wm to 10–6 Wm. At the other end are insulators like ceramic, rubber and plastics having resistivities 1018 times greater than metals or more. In between the two are the semiconductors. These, however, have resistivities characteristically decreasing with a rise in temperature. The resistivities of semiconductors can be decreased by adding small amount of suitable impurities. This last feature is exploited in use of semiconductors for electronic devices. 3.8 TEMPERATURE DEPENDENCE OF RESISTIVITY The resistivity of a material is found to be dependent on the temperature. Different materials do not exhibit the same dependence on temperatures. Over a limited range of temperatures, that is not too large, the resistivity of a metallic conductor is approximately given by, r  = r  [1 + a (T–T )] (3.26) T 0 0 where r  is the resistivity at a temperature T and r  is the same at a T 0 reference temperature T . a is called the temperature co-efficient of 0 resistivity, and from Eq. (3.26), the dimension of a is (Temperature)–1. For  metals, a is positive. The relation of Eq. (3.26) implies that a graph of r  plotted against T T would be a straight line. At temperatures much lower than 0°C, the graph, however, deviates considerably from a straight line (Fig. 3.8). Equation (3.26) thus, can be used approximately over a limited range of T around any reference temperature T , where the graph can be 0 approximated as a straight line.  FIGURE 3.8 FIGURE 3.9 Resistivity FIGURE 3.10 Resistivity r  of r  of nichrome as a T Temperature dependence T copper as a function function of absolute of resistivity for a typical of temperature T. temperature T. semiconductor. Some materials like Nichrome (which is an alloy of nickel, iron and chromium) exhibit a very weak dependence of resistivity with temperature (Fig. 3.9). Manganin and constantan have similar properties. These materials are thus widely used in wire bound standard resistors since 90 their resistance values would change very little with temperatures. 2024-25 Current Electricity Unlike metals, the resistivities of semiconductors decrease with increasing temperatures. A typical dependence is shown in Fig. 3.10. We can qualitatively understand the temperature dependence of resistivity, in the light of our derivation of Eq. (3.23). From this equation, resistivity of a material is given by ρ = 1 = m σ 2 (3.27) n e τ r thus depends inversely both on the number n of free electrons per unit volume and on the average time t between collisions. As we increase temperature, average speed of the electrons, which act as the carriers of current, increases resulting in more frequent collisions. The average time of collisions t, thus decreases with temperature. In a metal, n is not dependent on temperature to any appreciable extent and thus the decrease in the value of t with rise in temperature causes r to increase as we have observed. For insulators and semiconductors, however, n increases with temperature. This increase more than compensates any decrease in t in Eq.(3.23) so that for such materials, r decreases with temperature. Example 3.3 An electric toaster uses nichrome for its heating element. When a negligibly small current passes through it, its resistance at room temperature (27.0 °C) is found to be 75.3 W. When the toaster is connected to a 230 V supply, the current settles, after a few seconds, to a steady value of 2.68 A. What is the steady temperature of the nichrome element? The temperature coefficient of resistance of nichrome averaged over the temperature range involved, is 1.70 × 10–4 °C–1. Solution  When the current through the element is very small, heating effects can be ignored and the temperature T  of the element is the 1 same as room temperature. When the toaster is connected to the supply, its initial current will be slightly higher than its steady value of 2.68 A. But due to heating effect of the current, the temperature will rise. This will cause an increase in resistance and a slight decrease in current. In a few seconds, a steady state will be reached when temperature will rise no further, and both the resistance of the element and the current drawn will achieve steady values. The resistance R  at the steady temperature T  is 2 2 = 230 V R  = 85.8 Ω 2 2.68 A Using the relation R  = R  [1 + a (T  – T )] 2 1 2 1 with a = 1.70 × 10–4 °C–1, we get (85.8 – 75.3) T  – T 2 1 =   = 820 °C (75.3)×1.70 ×10–4 that is,  T = (820 + 27.0) °C = 847 °C 2 Thus, the steady temperature of the heating element (when heating effect due to the current equals heat loss to the surroundings) is 91 847 °C. 2024-25 EXAMPLE 3.3 Physics Example 3.4 The resistance of the platinum wire of a platinum resistance thermometer at the ice point is 5 W and at steam point is 5.23 W. When the thermometer is inserted in a hot bath, the resistance of the platinum wire is 5.795 W. Calculate the temperature of the bath. Solution R  = 5 W, R  = 5.23 W and R  = 5.795 W 0 100 t Rt − R0 Now, t = ×100, Rt = R0 (1+ α t ) R100 − R0 5.795 −5 = ×100 5.23 −5 0.795 = ×100  = 345.65 °C 0.23 3.9  ELECTRICAL ENERGY, POWER Consider a conductor with end points A and B, in which a current I is flowing from A to B. The electric potential at A and B are denoted by V (A) and V (B) respectively. Since current is flowing from A to B, V (A) > V (B) and the potential difference across  AB is V = V(A) – V(B) > 0. In a time interval Dt, an amount of charge DQ = I Dt travels from A to B. The potential energy of the charge at A, by definition, was Q V (A) and similarly at B, it is Q V(B). Thus, change in its potential energy DU  is pot DU  = Final potential energy – Initial potential energy pot = DQ[(V (B) – V (A)] = –DQ V = –I VDt < 0 (3.28) If charges moved without collisions through the conductor, their kinetic energy would also change so that the total energy is unchanged. Conservation of total energy would then imply that, DK =  –DU (3.29) pot that is, DK = I VDt > 0 (3.30) Thus, in case charges were moving freely through the conductor under the action of electric field, their kinetic energy would increase as they move. We have, however, seen earlier that on the average, charge carriers do not move with acceleration but with a steady drift velocity. This is because of the collisions with ions and atoms during transit. During collisions, the energy gained by the charges thus is shared with the atoms. The atoms vibrate more vigorously, i.e., the conductor heats up. Thus, in an actual conductor, an amount of energy dissipated as heat in the conductor during the time interval Dt is, DW = I VDt (3.31) The energy dissipated per unit time is the power dissipated P = DW/Dt  and we have, 92 P = I V (3.32) 2024-25 EXAMPLE 3.4 Current Electricity Using Ohm’s law V = IR, we get P = I 2 R = V 2/R (3.33) as the power loss (“ohmic loss”) in a conductor of resistance R carrying a current I. It is this power which heats up, for example, the coil of an electric bulb to incandescence, radiating out heat and light. Where does the power come from? As we have reasoned before, we need an external source to keep a steady current through the conductor. It is clearly this source which must supply this power. In the simple circuit shown with a cell (Fig.3.11), it is the chemical energy of the cell which supplies this power for as long as it can. The expressions for power, Eqs. (3.32) and (3.33), show the dependence of the power dissipated in a resistor R on the current through it and the voltage FIGURE 3.11 Heat is produced in the across it. resistor R which is connected across Equation (3.33) has an important application to the terminals of a cell. The energy power transmission. Electrical power is transmitted dissipated in the resistor R comes from from power stations to homes and factories, which the chemical energy of the electrolyte. may be hundreds of miles away, via transmission cables. One obviously wants to minimise the power loss in the transmission cables connecting the power stations to homes and factories. We shall  see now how this can be achieved. Consider a device R, to which a power P is to be delivered via transmission cables having a resistance R  to be dissipated by it finally. If V is the voltage c across R and I the current through it, then P = V I (3.34) The connecting wires from the power station to the device has a finite resistance R . The power dissipated in the connecting wires, which is c wasted is P   with c P  = I 2 R c c P 2 R = c . 5 V 2 (3 3 ) from Eq. (3.32). Thus, to drive a device of power P, the power wasted in the connecting wires is inversely proportional to V 2. The  transmission cables from power stations are hundreds of miles long and their resistance R  is c considerable. To reduce P , these wires carry current at enormous values c of V and this is the reason for the high voltage danger signs on transmission lines — a common sight as we move away from populated areas. Using electricity at such voltages is not safe and hence at the other end, a device called a transformer lowers the voltage to a value suitable for use. 3.10 CELLS, EMF, INTERNAL RESISTANCE We have already mentioned that a simple device to maintain a steady current in an electric circuit is the electrolytic cell. Basically a cell has two electrodes, called the positive (P) and the negative (N), as shown in 93 2024-25 Physics Fig. 3.12. They are immersed in an electrolytic solution. Dipped in the solution, the electrodes exchange charges with the electrolyte. The positive electrode has a potential difference V  (V  > 0) between + + itself and the electrolyte solution immediately adjacent to it marked A in the figure. Similarly, the negative electrode develops a negative potential  – (V  ) (V   0) rel tiv  to the electrolyte adjacent to it, – ≥  a e – marked as B in the figure. When there is no current, the electrolyte has the same potential throughout, so that the potential difference between P and N is V  – (–V ) = V  + V  . This difference is called the + – + – electromotive force (emf) of the cell and is denoted by e. Thus e = V +V  > 0 (3.36) + –