Chapter 10 Internal trade LEARNING OBJECTIVES After studying this chapter, you should be able to: •	 describe the meaning and types of internal trade; •	 specify the services of wholesalers to manufactures and retailers; •	 explain the services of retailers; •	 classify the types of retailers; •	 explain the forms of small scale and large scale retailers; and •	 state the role of Chambers of Commerce and industry in the promotion of internal trade. •	 officiate	the	implementation	of	GST 2024-25 Chapter 10.indd   215 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM 216 BUSINESS  STUDIES Have	 you	 ever	 thought	 if	 there	 were	 no	markets,	 how	 products	 of	 different manufacturers would reach us? We are all aware of our general provisions store round the corner which is selling items of our daily need. But is that enough? When we	need	to	buy	items	of	a	specialised	nature,	we	like	to	look	at	bigger	markets	or shops with variety. Our observation tells us that there are different types of shops selling different items or specialised goods and depending on our requirements we	purchase	from	certain	shops	or	markets.	In	rural	areas,	we	may	have	noticed people selling their goods on the streets, these goods may range from vegetables to clothes.	This	is	a	completely	different	scene	from	what	we	see	in	the	urban	areas.	In our	country,	all	kinds	of	markets	co-exist	in	harmony.	With	the	advent	of	imported goods and multinational corporations, we have shops selling these products too. In big towns and cities, there are many retail shops selling particular branded products only. Another aspect of all this is, how these products reach the shops from	the	manufacturers?	There	must	be	some	middlemen	doing	this	job.	Are	they really useful or do prices increase because of them? 10.1  IntroductIon countries, on the other hand, is called Trade	refers	to	buying	and	selling	of	 external	 trade.	 The	 present	 chapter goods and services with the objective discusses in detail the meaning and of	 earning	profit.	Mankind	has	been	 nature of internal trade and explains engaged in trading, in some form or the its different types and the role of other, since early days of civilisation. chambers of commerce in promoting The	 importance	 of	 trade	 in	modern	 internal trade. times has increased as new products are being developed every day and are 10.2 Internal trade being made available for consumption Buying and selling of goods and services throughout the world. No individual or within the boundaries of a nation are country	can	claim	to	be	self-sufficient	 referred to as internal trade. Whether in producing all the goods and services the products are purchased from a required	 by	 it.	 Thus,	 each	 one	 is	 neighbourhood shop in a locality or a engaged in producing what it is best central	market	or	a	departmental	store suited to produce and exchanging the or a mall or even from any door-to-door excess produce with others. salesperson or from an exhibition, all On the basis of geographical these are examples of internal trade location of buyers and sellers, trade as the goods are purchased from an can broadly be classified into two individual or establishment within a categories (i) Internal trade; and (ii) country. No custom duty or import External	 trade.	 Trade	 which	 takes	 duty is levied on such trade as goods place within a country is called internal are part of domestic production and trade.	 Trade	 between	 two	 or	more	 are meant for domestic consumption. 2024-25 Chapter 10.indd   216 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM INTERNAL TRADE 217 Generally,	payment	has	to	be	made	in	 10.3 Wholesale trade the legal tender of the country or any As discussed in the previous section, other acceptable currency. wholesale trade refers to buying and Internal	trade	can	be	classified	into	 selling of goods and services in large two broad categories viz., (i) wholesale quantities for the purpose of resale or trade	and	(ii)	retail	trade.	Generally,	for	 intermediate use. products, which are to be distributed Wholesaling is concerned with to a large number of buyers who the activities of those persons or are located over a wide geographical es tab l i shments  which se l l  to area,	it	becomes	very	difficult	for	the	 retailers and other merchants, and/ or to industrial, institutional and producers to reach all the consumers commercial users but who do not or users directly. For example, if sell	in	significant	amount	to	ultimate vegetable oil or bathing soap or salt consumers. Wholesalers serve as an produced in a factory in any part of important	link	between	manufacturers the country are to reach millions of and	 retailers.	 They	 enable	 the consumers throughout the country, producers not only to reach large the help of wholesalers and retailers number of buyers spread over a wide becomes very important. Purchase geographical area (through retailers), but also  to perform a variety of and sale of goods and services in large functions in the process of distribution quantities for the purpose of resale of	goods	and	services.	They	generally or intermediate use is referred to as take	 the	 title	 of	 the	 goods	 and	 bear wholesale trade. the	business	risks	by	purchasing	and On the other hand, purchase selling the goods in their own name. and sale of goods in relatively small They	purchase	in	bulk	and	sell	in	small quantities, generally to the ultimate lots to retailers or industrial users. consumers, is referred to as retail They	undertake	various	activities	such as	grading	of	products,	packing	 into trade.	 Traders	 dealing	 in	wholesale	 smaller lots, storage, transportation, trade are called wholesale traders promotion of goods, collection of and those dealing in retail trade are market	information,	collection	of	small called retailers. Both retailers and and scattered orders of retailers and wholesalers	are	important	marketing	 distribution	of	supplies	to	them.	They intermediaries who perform very useful also relieve the retailers of maintaining functions in the process of exchange of large	stock	of	articles	and	extend	credit goods and services  between producers facilities	to	them.	Most	of	the	functions performed by wholesalers are such and users or ultimate consumers. which cannot be eliminated. If there Internal trade aims at equitable are no wholesalers, these functions distribution of goods within a nation shall have to be performed either by speedily and at reasonable cost. the manufacturers or the retailers. 2024-25 Chapter 10.indd   217 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM 218 BUSINESS  STUDIES Services of Wholesalers purchased	by	them.	To	that	extent,	the Wholesalers provide various services manufacturers	 need	 not	 block	 their to manufacturers as well as retailers capital	in	the	stocks.	Sometimes	they and provide immense help in the also advance money to the producers distribution of goods and services. for	bulk	orders	placed	by	them. (iv) Expert advice: As the wholesalers By	making	the	products	available	at	 are in direct contact with the retailers, a place where these are needed and they are in a position to advice the at a time when these are needed for manufacturers about various aspects consumption or use, they provide both including customer’s tastes and the	time	and	place	utility.	The	various	 preferences,	 market	 conditions, services of wholesalers to different competitive activities and the features sections are discussed below: preferred	 by	 the	 buyers.	 They	 serve 10.3.1 Services to Manufacturers as	 an	 important	 source	 of	market information on these and related Major	services	offered	by	wholesalers	 aspects. to the producers of goods and services (v) Help in marketing function: are given as below: The	 wholesalers	 take	 care	 of	 the (i) Facilitating large scale production: distribution of goods to a number of Wholesalers collect small orders retailers who, in turn, sell these goods from a number of retailers and pass to a large number of customers spread on the pool of such orders to the over	 a	 large	 geographical	 area.	 This manufacturers	 and	make	 purchases	 relieves the manufacturers from many in	 bulk	 quantities.	 This	 enables	 the	 of	the	marketing	activities	and	enable producers	to	undertake	production	on	 them to concentrate on the production a	large	scale	and	take	advantage	of	the	 activity. economies of scale. (vi) Facilitate production continuity: (ii) Bearing risk:	 The	 wholesale	 The	wholesalers	facilitate	continuity	of merchants deal in goods in their own production activity throughout the name,	take	delivery	of	the	goods	and	 year by purchasing the goods as and keep	the	goods	purchased	in	large	lots	 when these are produced and storing in their warehouses. In the process, them till the time these are demanded they	bear	variety	of	risks	such	as	the	 by retailers or consumers in the risk	of	 fall	 in	prices,	 theft,	 pilferage,	 market. spoilage,	fire,	etc.	To	that	extent,	they	 (vii) Storage: 	 Wholesalers	 take relieve the manufacturers from bearing delivery of goods when these are these	risks. produced	 in	 factory	 and	 keep	 them (iii) Financial assistance: 	 The	 in	 their	 godowns/warehouses.	 This wholesa lers  prov ide  f inanc ia l reduces the burden of manufacturers assistance to the manufacturers of providing for storage facilities for the in the sense that they generally finished	products.	They	thus	provide make	 cash	 payment	 for	 the	 goods	 time utility. 2024-25 Chapter 10.indd   218 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM INTERNAL TRADE 219 10.3.2 Services to Retailers (v) Risk sharing:	 The	 wholesalers The	 important	 services	 offered	 by	 purchase	in	bulk	and	sell	in	relatively manufacturers to the retailers are small quantities to the retailers. Being described as below: able to purchase merchandise in (i) Availability of goods: Retailers smaller quantities, retailers are in a have	 to	 maintain	 adequate	 stock	 position	 to	avoid	 the	risk	of	storage, of varied commodities so that they pilferage, obsolescence, reduction in can offer variety to their customers. prices and demand fluctuations in The	wholesalers	make	 the	 products	 respect of larger quantites of goods of various manufacturers readily that they would have to purchase in available	to	the	retailers.	This	relieves	 case the services of wholesalers are the	retailers	of	the	work	of	collecting	 not available. goods from several producers and keeping	big	inventory	of	the	same. 10.4 retaIl trade (ii) Marketing support:	 The	whole- A retailer is a business enterprise salers	 perform	 various	 marketing	 that is engaged in the sale of goods functions and provide support to the and services directly to the ultimate retailers.	They	undertake	advertising	 consumers.	The	retailer	normally	buys and other sales promotional activities goods in large quantities from the to induce customers to purchase the wholesalers and sells them in small goods.	The	retailers	are	benefitted	as	it	 quantities to the ultimate consumers. helps them in increasing the demand The	retails	represents	the	final		stage for various new products. in the distribution where goods are (iii) Grant of credit:	The	wholesalers	 transferred from the hands of the generally extend credit facilities to manufacturers or wholesalers to the their	regular	customers.	This	enables	 final	consumers	or	users.	Retailing	is, the retailers to manage their business thus, that branch of business which with	relatively	small	amount	of	working	 is devoted to the sale of goods and capital. services to the ultimate consumers for (iv) Specialised knowledge:	 The	 their personal and non-business use. wholesalers specialise in one line of There	may	 be	 different	 ways	 of products	 and	know	 the	pulse	 of	 the	 selling the goods viz., personally, market.	 They	 pass	 on	 the	 benefit	 of	 on telephone, or through vending their	 specialised	 knowledge	 to	 the	 machines. Also, the products may be retailers.	 They	 inform	 the	 retailers	 sold at different places, viz., in a store, about the new products, their uses, at the customer’s house or any other quality,	 prices,	 etc.	 They	may	 also	 place.	Some	of	the	common	situations advise them on the decor of the retail that we encounter in our daily life, outlet, allocation of shelf space and for example, are the sale of ball pens demonstration of certain products. or	 some	magic	medicine	 or	 book	 of 2024-25 Chapter 10.indd   219 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM 220 BUSINESS  STUDIES jokes	 in	 the	 roadways	 buses;	 the	 (i) Help in distribution of goods: A sale of cosmetics/detergent powder, retailer’s most important service to the on door-to-door sales basis; and the wholesalers and manufacturers is to sale of vegetables by the road side provide help in the distribution of their by a small farmer. But as long as the products	 by	making	 these	 available goods are sold to ultimate consumers, to	 the	final	 consumers,	who	may	be these will be treated as cases of retail scattered over a large geographic area. selling.	Thus,	irrespective	of	‘how’	the	 They	thus	provide	place	utility. products	are	sold	or	‘where’	the	sale	is	 (ii) Personal selling: In the process made, if the sales are made directly to of sale of most consumer goods, some the consumers, it will be considered amount of personal selling effort is as retailing. A retailer performs different necessary.	By	undertaking	 personal functions in the distribution of goods selling efforts, the retailers relieve the and services. He/she purchases a producers of this activity and greatly variety of products from the wholesale help them in the process of actualising distributors and others, arranges for the sale of the products. proper storage of goods, sells the goods (iii) Enabling large-scale operations: in small quantities, bears  business On account of retailer’s services, the risks,	 grades	 the	 products,	 collects	 manufacturers and wholesalers are market	 information,	 extends	 credit	 to	 freed	 from	 the	 trouble	 of	 making the buyers and promotes the sale of individual sales to consumers in products through displays, participation small	 quantities.	 This	 enables	 them in various schemes, etc. to operate on, at relatively large scale, and thereby fully concentrate on their Services of Retailers other activities. Retailers	 serve	 as	 an	 important	 link	 (iv) Collecting market information: between the producers and final As retailers remain in direct and consumers in the distribution of constant touch with the buyers, products	 and	 services.	 They	 provide	 they serve as an important source of useful services to the consumers, collecting	market	 information	 about wholesalers	and	manufacturers.	Some	 the tastes, preferences and attitudes of the important services of retailers of	 customers.	 Such	 information	 is are described as below: considered	 very	 useful	 in	 taking important	marketing	decisions	 in	an 10.4.1 Services to Manufacturers organisation. and Wholesalers (v)  Help in promotion:  From The	 invaluable	 services	 that	 the time-to-time, manufacturers and retailers render to the wholesalers and distributors have to carry on various producers are given as here under: promotional activities in order to 2024-25 Chapter 10.indd   220 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM INTERNAL TRADE 221 increase the sale of their products. selling efforts, retailers provide For example, they have to advertise important information about the their products and offer short-term arrival, special features, etc., of new incentives in the form of coupons, products	 to	 the	 customers.	 This free gifts, sales contests, and so on. serves as an important factor in the Retailers participate in these activities buying	decision	making	process	of	the in various ways and, thereby, help in purchase of such goods. promoting the sale of the products. (iii) Convenience in buying: Retailers 10.4.2 Services to Consumers generally buy goods in large quantities Some	 of	 the	 important	 services	 of	 and sell these in small quantities, retailers from the point of view of according to the requirements of their consumers are as follows : customers. Also, they are normally situated very near to the residential (i) Regular availability of products: areas and remain open for long hours. The	 most	 important	 service	 of	 a	 This	 offers	 great	 convenience	 to	 the retailer to consumers is to maintain customers in buying products of their regular availability of various products requirements. produced by different manufacturers. This	enables	the	buyers	to	buy	products	 (iv) Wide selection: Retailers generally as and when needed. keep	stock	of	a	variety	of	products	of (ii) New products information: different	manufacturers.	This	enables By arranging for effective display of the	 consumers	 to	make	 their	 choice products and through their personal out of a wide selection of goods. Terms of Trade The	following	are	the	main	terms	used	in	the	trade 1. Cash on delivery (COD):- It refers to a type of transaction in which payment for goods or services is made at the time of delivery. If the buyer is unable to	make	payment	when	the	goods	or	services	are	delivered	then	it	will	be returned to the seller. 2. Free on Board or Free on Rail (FoB or FOR):- It rerers to a contract between the seller and the buyer in which all the expenses up to the point of delivery to a carrier (it may be a ship, rail, lorry, etc.) are to be borne by seller. 3. Cost, Insurance and Freight (CFF):- It is the price of goods which includes not only the cost of goods but also the insurance and frieght charges payable on goods upto destination port. 4. Errors and Omissions Excepted(E&OE):- It refers to that term which is used in	trade	documents	to	say	that	mistakes	and	things	that	have	been	forgotten should	be	taken	into	account. 2024-25 Chapter 10.indd   221 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM 222 BUSINESS  STUDIES (v) After-sales services: Retailers 10.5.1 Itinerant Retailers provide important after-sales services in the form of home delivery, supply Itinerant retailers are traders who do of spare parts and attending to not	have	a	fixed	place	of	business	to customers.	This	becomes	an	important	 operate	 from.	 They	 keep	 on	moving factor in the buyers’ decision for repeat with their wares from street to street or purchase of the products. place to place, in search of customers. (vi) Provide credit facilities:	 The	 Characteristics retailers sometimes provide credit facilities	to	their	regular	buyers.	This	 	 (a)	 They	are	small	traders	operating enables the latter to increase their level with limited resources. of consumption and, thereby, their 	 (b)	 They	normally	deal	in	consumer standard of living. products of daily use such as toiletry products, fruits and 10.5 types of retaIlIng trade vegetables, and so on. There	 are	many	 types	 of	 retailers	 in	 	 (c)	 The	emphasis	of	such	traders	is India. For proper understanding, it on providing greater customer would be useful, to classify them into service	 by	making	 the	 products certain common categories. Different available at the very doorstep of classifications have been used by the customers. experts to categorise retailers into 	 (d)	 As	 they	 do	 not	 have	 any	 fixed different types. For example, on the business establishment to operate basis	 of	 ‘size	 of	 business’,	 they	may	 from, these retailers have to be categorised into large, medium and keep	 their	 limited	 inventory	 of small	retailers.	On	the	basis	of	‘type	of	 merchandise either at home or at ownership’, they may be categorised some other place. into	 ‘sole	 trader’,	 ‘partnership	 firm’,	 Some	of	 the	most	 common	 types ‘cooperative	 store’	 and	 ‘company’.	 of itinerant retailers operating in India Similarly,	on	the	basis	of		‘merchandise	 are as below: handled’,	the	different	classifications	 (i) Peddlers and hawkers: Peddlers may	be	‘speciality	store’,	‘supermarket’	 and	hawkers	are	probably	amongst	the and	 ‘departmental	 store’.	 Another	 oldest	form	of	retailers	in	the	market common basis of classification is place who have not lost their utility whether	or	not	they	have	a	fixed	place	 even	during	the	modern	times.	They of business. On this basis, there are are small producers or petty traders two categories of retailers: who carry the products on a bicycle, a (a) Itinerant retailers, and hand	cart,	a	cycle-rickshaw	or	on	their (b) Fixed shop retailers heads, and move from place to place to Both these types of retailers have sell their merchandise at the doorstep been described in detail  in the sections of	the	customers.	They	generally	deal that follow here after. in non-standardised and low-value 2024-25 Chapter 10.indd   222 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM INTERNAL TRADE 223 products such as toys, vegetables and of a temporary nature in a business fruits,	 fabrics,	 carpets,	 snacks	 and	 locality.	They	keep	on	changing	their ice	creams,	etc.	They	are	also	 found	 business from one locality to another, in streets of residential areas, places depending upon the potentiality of the of exhibitions or meals, and outside area. However, the change of place schools,	during	a	lunch	break. is not as frequent as in the case of The	main	advantage	of	this	form	of	 hawkers	or	market	traders.	They	deal retailing is the provision of convenient in consumer items as well as services service to the consumers. However, such as repair of watches, shoes, one should be careful in dealing with buckets	etc. them, as the products they deal in are not always reliable in terms of quality 10.5.2 Fixed Shop Retailers and price. This	 is	 the	 most	 common	 type	 of (ii) Market traders:	Market	 traders	 retailing	 in	 the	market	 place.	 As	 is are the small retailers who open their evident from the name, these are shops at different places on fixed retail shops who maintain permanent days	or	dates,	such	as	every	Saturday	 establishment to sell their merchandise. or	 alternate	 Saturdays,	 and	 so	 on.	 They,	 therefore,	 do	 not	move	 from These	traders	may	be	dealing	in	one	 place to place to serve their customers. particular line of merchandise, say Some	 of	 the	 other	 characteristics	 of fabrics or ready-made garments, toys, such traders are: or	 crockery,	 or	 alternatively,	 they may	be	general	merchants.	They	are	 Characteristics mainly catering to lower-income group  (a) Compared with the itinerant of customers and deal in low-priced traders, normally they have consumer items of daily use. greater resources and operate on (iii) Street traders (pavement a relatively large scale. However, vendors): Street	 traders	 are	 the	 there are different size groups of small retailers who are commonly fixed	shop	 retailers,	 varying	 from found	 at	 places	where	 huge	 floating	 very small to very large. population gathers, for example, near 	(b)	These	 retailers	may	 be	 dealing railway stations and bus stands, and in different products, including sell consumer items of common use, consumer durables as well as nonsuch as stationery items, eatables, durables. ready-made garments, newspapers 	(c)	 This	 category	 of	 retailers	 has and	magazines.	They	are	different	from	 greater credibility in the minds market	traders	in	the	sense	that	they	 of customers, and they are in a do not change their place of business position to provide greater services so frequently. to the customers such as home (iv) Cheap jacks:	Cheap	jacks	are	petty	 delivery, guarantees, repairs, credit retailers who have independent shops facilities, availability of spares, etc. 2024-25 Chapter 10.indd   223 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM 224 BUSINESS  STUDIES Types of products. For example, shops selling The	 fixed-shop	 retailers	 can	 be	 children’s garments, men’s wear, ladies classified	 into	 two	 distinct	 types	 on	 shoes, toys and gifts, school uniforms, the basis of the size of their operations. college	books	or	consumer	electronic These	are: goods,	 etc.	 These	 are	 some	 of	 the (a)	small	shop-keepers,	and commonly found stores of this type in (b) large retailers. the	marketplace. The	 different	 types	 of	 retailers	 The	speciality	shops	are	generally falling under the above two broad located in a central place where a large heads are described as follows: number of customers can be attracted, and they provide a wide choice to the Fixed Shop Small Retailers customers in the selection of goods. (iii) Street stall holders:	These	small (i) General stores:	 General	 stores	 vendors are commonly found at street are most commonly found in a local crossings	or	other	places	where	flow	of market	and	residential	areas.	As	the	 traffic	 is	heavy.	They	attract	floating name indicates, these shops carry customers and deal mainly in goods stock	of	a	variety	of	products	required	 of	cheap	variety	like	hosiery	products, to satisfy the day-to-day needs of toys,	cigarettes,	soft	drinks,	etc.	They the consumers residing in nearby get their supplies from local suppliers localities.	Such	stores	remain	open	for	 as	well	as	wholesalers.	The	total	area long hours at convenient timings and covered by a stall is very limited and, often provide credit facilities to some therefore, they handle goods on a very of their regular customers. small	scale.	Their	main	advantage	is The	 biggest	 advantage	 of	 such	 in providing convenient service to the stores is in terms of convenience to customers in buying some of the items the customers in buying products of of their needs. daily use such as grocery items, soft (iv) Second-hand goods shop:	These drinks,	 toiletry	 products,	 stationery	 shops deal in second-hand or used and confectionery. As most of their goods,	like	books,	clothes,	automobiles, customers are residents of the furniture and other household goods. same locality, an important factor Generally	persons	with	modest	means contributing to their success is the purchase	goods	from	such	shops.	The image of the owner and the rapport he goods	are	sold	at	 lower	prices.	Such has established with them. shops	may	also	stock	rare	objects	of (ii) Speciality shops:	 This	 type	 of	 historical value and antique items retail store is, of late, becoming very which are sold at rather heavy prices popular, particularly in urban areas. to people who have special interest in Instead of selling a variety of products such antique goods. of different types, these retail stores The	 shops,	 selling	 second-hand specialise	in	the	sale	of	a	specific	line	 goods may be located at street crossings 2024-25 Chapter 10.indd   224 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM INTERNAL TRADE 225 or in busy streets in the form of a stall Some	 of	 the	 important	 features having very little structure —a table of a departmental store are or a temporary platform to display as follows: the	 books	 or	may	 have	 reasonably	  (a) A modern departmental store good infrastructure, as in the case of may provide all facilities such as those selling furniture or used cars or restaurant, travel and information scooters or motorcycles. bureau, telephone booth, rest- rooms, etc. As such they try Fixed shop — Large stores to provide maximum service 1. Departmental stores to higher class of customers A departmental store is a large for whom price is of secondary establishment offering a wide importance. variety	of	products,	classified	into	 	 (b)	 These	stores	are	generally	located well-defined	departments,	aimed at a central place in the heart at satisfying practically every of a city, which caters to a large customer’s need under one roof. number of customers. It has a number of departments,  (c) As the size of these stores is very each	one	confining	its	activities	to	 large, they are generally formed as one	kind	of	product.	For	example,	 a	 joint	stock	company	managed there may be separate departments by	a	board	of	directors.	There	is for toiletries, medicines, furniture, a managing director assisted by groceries, electronics, clothing a general manager and several and dress material within a store. department managers. Thus,	they	satisfy	diverse	market	  (d) A departmental store combines segments with a wide variety both the functions of retailing of goods and services. It is not a s  we l l  a s  wa r ehous ing . uncommon for a department They	 purchase	 directly	 from store	 in	 the	 United	 States	 of	 manufacturers and operate America	 to	 carry	 ‘needle	 to	 an	 separate	 warehouses.	 That aeroplane’	or	‘all	shopping	under	 way they help in eliminating one	roof.’		Everything	from	‘a	pin	 undesirable middlemen between to an elephant’ is the spirit behind the producers and the customers. a typical department store.  (e) They	have	centralised purchasing In India real departmental stores arrangements. All the purchases have not yet come in a big way in a department store are made in the retailing business. However, central ly  by the purchase some stores on this line in department of the store, whereas India	include	‘Akberally’	in	Mumbai sales are decentralised in different and	 ‘Spencers’	 in	 Chennai. departments. 2024-25 Chapter 10.indd   225 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM 226 BUSINESS  STUDIES Advantages Limitations The	major	 advantages	 of	 retailing	 However, there are certain limitations through departmental stores may be of	 this	 type	 of	 retailing.	 These	 are listed as follows: described as follows: ( i )  Att ract  large  number  o f (i) Lack of personal attention: customers: As these stores are usually Because of the large-scale operations, located at central places, they attract a it	is	very	difficult	to	provide	adequate large number of customers during the personal attention to the customers in best part of the day. these stores. (ii) Convenience in buying: By (ii) High operating cost: As these offering large variety of goods under stores give more emphasis on providing one roof, the departmental stores services, their operating costs tend to provide great convenience to customers be	 on	 the	 higher	 side.	 These	 costs, in buying almost all goods of their in	turn,	make	the	prices	of	the	goods requirements at one place. As a result, high.	They	are,	therefore,	not	attractive customers do not have to run from to the lower income group of people. one place to another to complete their (iii) High possibility of loss: As a shopping. result of high operating costs and (iii)  Attractive  services:   A large-scale operations, the chances departmental store aims at providing of incurring losses in a departmental maximum services to the customers. store are high. For example, if there is any change in the tastes of customers Some	 of	 the	 services	 offered	 by	 it	 or latest fashions, it necessitates include home delivery of goods, selling of such out-of-fashion articles execution of telephone orders, grant in clearance sale, to reduce the huge of credit facilities and provision for inventory of goods built up. restrooms,  te lephone booths , (iv) Inconvenient location: As restaurants, saloons, etc. a departmental store is generally ( iv )  Economy of  large -sca le situated at a central location, it is not operations: As these stores are convenient for the purchase of goods organised at a very large scale, the that are needed at short notice. benefits of large scale operations, In spite of some of these limitations particularly, in respect of purchase of the departmental stores have been goods are available to them. popular in some of the western (v )  Promotion of  sa les : 	 The countries of the world because of departmental stores are in a position to their benefits to a certain class of spend considerable amount of money customers. on advertising and other promotional  2. Chain Stores or Multiple Shops: activities, which help in boosting their Chain stores or multiple shops sales. are	networks	of	retail	shops	that 2024-25 Chapter 10.indd   226 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM Internal trade 227 are owned and operated by daily reports to the head office manufacturers or intermediaries. in respect of the sales, cash Under this type of arrangement, deposits, and the require-ments a number of shops with similar of the stock. appearance are established in  (d) All the branches are controlled by localities, spread over different the head office, which is concerned parts of the country. These with formulating the policies and different shops normally deal getting them implemented. in standardised and branded  (e) The prices of goods in such consumer products, which have shops are fixed and all sales rapid sales turnover. These shops are made on cash basis.  The are run by the same organisation cash realised from the sales of and have identical merchandising merchandise is deposited daily into a local bank account on strategies, with identical products behalf of the head office, and a and displays. Some of the report is sent to the head office important features of such shops in this regard. may be described as follows:  (f) The head office normally appoints (a) These shops are located in inspectors, who are concerned fairly populous localities, where with day-to-day supervision of sufficient number of customers the shops, in respect of quality can be approached.  The idea of customer service provided, is to serve the customers at a adherence to the policies of the point which is nearest to their head office, and so on. residence or work place, rather The chain operation is most effective than attracting them to a central in handling high-volume merchandise, place. whose sales are relatively constant (b) The manufacturing/procurement throughout the year. In India, Bata of merchandise for all the retail Shoe stores DCM, Nirula’s Raymonds units is centralised at the head etc., are typical examples of such office, from where the goods are shops. despatched to each of these shops according to their requirements. Advantages This results in savings in the cost Multiple shops are offering various of operation of these stores. advantages to the consumers, which (c) Each retail shop is under the are described as follows: direct supervision of a Branch (i) Economies of scale: As there is Manager, who is held responsible central procurement, the multiple-shop for its day-to-day management. organisation enjoys the economies of The Branch Manager sends scale. 2024-25 Chapter 10.indd   227 18-04-2024   11:38:20 228 BUSINESS  STUDIES (ii) Elimination of middlemen: By of other manufacturers. In that way selling directly to the consumers, the the consumers get only a limited choice multiple-shop organisation is able to of	goods.	This,	however	is	not	the	case eliminate unnecessary middlemen in with retailer owned chain stores such the sale of goods and services. as Big Apple or Reliance Retail which (iii) No bad debts:	Since	all	the	sales	 sell products of a large number of in these shops are made on cash basis, manufacturers. there are no losses on account of bad (ii) Lack of initiative: The	personnel debts. managing the multiple shops have to (iv) Transfer of goods:	 The	 goods	 obey the instructions received from not in demand in a particular locality the	 head	 office.	 	 This	makes	 them may be transferred to another locality habitual	 of	 looking	 up	 to	 the	 head where	it	is	in	demand.		This	reduces	 office	for	guidance	on	all	matters,	and the	 chances	 of	 dead	 stock	 in	 these	 takes	away	the	initiative	from	them	to shops. use	their	creative	skills	to	satisfy	the (v) Diffusion of risk:	 The	 losses	 customers. incurred by one shop may be covered (iii) Lack of personal touch: Lack	of by	profits	in	other	shops,	reducing	the	 initiative in the employees sometimes total	risk	of	an	organisation. leads	 to	 indifference	 and	 lack	 of (vi) Low cost: Because of centralised personal touch in them. purchasing, elimination of middlemen, (iv) Difficult to change demand: centralised promotion of sales and If the demand for the merchandise increased sales, the multiple shops handled by multiple shops change have lower cost of business. rapidly, the management may have (vii) Flexibility: Under this system, to sustain huge losses because of if	a	shop	is	not	operating	at	a	profit,	 large	 stocks	 lying	 unsold	 at	 the the management may decide to close it central depot. or shift it to some other place without really	affecting	the	profitability	of	the	 Difference between Departmental organisation as a whole. stores and Multiple shops Limitations Although both these types of retail organisations are large establishments, (i) Limited selection of goods: there are certain differences between Some	of	the	multiple	shops	deal	only	 the	 two.	 Such	 differences	 are	 given in	 limited	 range	of	products.	This	 is	 here below: especially the problem with the chain (i) Location: A departmental store stores which are owned and operated is located at a central place, where by manufacterers, and as such mostly a large number of customers can be sell the products produced by the attracted to it.  However, the multiple themselves.	They	do	not	sell	products	 stores are located at a number of 2024-25 Chapter 10.indd   228 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM INTERNAL TRADE 229 places for approaching a large number (vi) Credit facilities: All sales in the of	customers.		Thus,	central	location	 multiple shops are made strictly on cash is not necessary for a multiple shop. basis. In contrast, the departmental (ii) Range of products:  Departmental stores may provide credit facilities to stores aim at satisfying all the needs some of their regular customers. of customers under one roof. As (vii) Flexibility: As the departmental such, they have to carry a variety of stores deal in a wide variety of products, products of different types. However, they	have	certain	flexibility	in	respect the multiple stores generally aim to of	the	line	of	goods	marketed.		However, satisfy the requirements of customers there	is	not	much	scope	for	flexibility relating	 to	 a	 specified	 range	 of	 their	 in the chain stores, which deal only in products only. limited line of products. ( i i i )  S e r v i c e s  o f f e r e d : 	 Th e departmental stores lay great emphasis Mail Order Houses on providing maximum service to their customers.	 	 Some	 of	 the	 services,	 Mail	 order	 houses	 are	 the	 retail provided by them include alteration outlets that sell their merchandise of garments, restaurant and so on. through	mail.	 There	 is	 generally	 no As against this, the multiple shops direct personal contact between the provide	very	limited	service	confined	to	 buyers and the sellers in this type of guarantees and repairs if  the sold out trading. For obtaining orders, potential goods turn out to be defective. customers are approached through (iv) Pricing:	 The	 multiple	 shop	 advertisements in newspapers or chains	sell	goods	at	fixed	prices	and	 magazines, circulars, catalogues, maintain uniform pricing policies samples and bills, and price lists for	 all	 the	 shops.	 The	 departmental	 sent to them by post. All the relevant stores, however, do not have uniform information about the products pricing policy for all the departments; rather they have to occasionally offer such as the price, features, delivery discounts on certain products and terms, terms of payment, etc., are varieties	to	clear	their	stock. described in the advertisement. On (v) Class of customers:	The	depart- receiving the orders, the items are mental stores cater to the needs carefully scrutinised with respect to of relatively high income group of the	 specifications	 asked	 for	 by	 the customers who care more for the buyers and are complied with through services provided rather than the prices the	post	office. of	 the	product.	 	The	multiple	shops,	 There	can	be	different	alternatives on the other hand, cater to different for receiving payments. First, the types of customers, including those customers	may	 be	 asked	 to	make belonging to the lower income groups, full	payment	in	advance.	Second,	the who are interested in buying quality goods may be sent by Value Payable goods at reasonable prices. Post (VPP). Under this arrangement, 2024-25 Chapter 10.indd   229 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM 230 BUSINESS  STUDIES the goods are sent through post and infrastructural	 facilities.	 Therefore, are delivered to the customers only it can be started with relatively low on	making	full	payment	for	the	same.	 amount of capital. Third,	the	goods	may	be	sent	through	 (ii) Elimination of middle men: a	bank,	which	is	instructed	to	deliver	 The	 biggest	 advantage	 of	mail-order the articles to the customers. In this business from the point of view arrangement	 there	 is	 no	 risk	 of	 bad	 of consumers is that unnecessary debt, as the goods are handed over middlemen between the buyers and to	the	buyers	only	after	he	makes	full	 sellers	are	eliminated.	This	may	result payment. However, there is a need in lot of savings both to the buyers as to ensure the buyers that the goods well as to the sellers. despatched are in accordance with (iii) Absence of bad debt:	Since	the their	specifications.	 mail order houses do not extend credit This	type	of	business	is	not	suitable	 facilities to the customers, there are for all types of products. For example, no chances of any bad debt on goods that are perishable in nature or account of non payment of cash by are	bulky	and	cannot	be	easily	handled,	 the customers. are not recommended for mail-house (iv) Wide reach: Under this system trading. Only the goods that can be the goods can be sent to all the places (i) graded and standardised, (ii) easily having	postal	services.	This	opens	wide transported at low cost, (iii) have scope for business as a large number ready	demand	in	the	market,	(iv)	are	 of people throughout the country can available in large quantity throughout be served through mail. the year, (v) involve least possible (v) Convenience: Under this system competition	 in	 the	market	 and	 (vi)	 goods are delivered at the doorstep of can be described through pictures the	 customers.	 This	 results	 in	 great etc., are suitable for this type of convenience to the customers in trading. Another important point in buying these products. this regard is that mail house business cannot be successfully carried out Limitations unless education is wide spread. (i) Lack of personal contact: As It is so because only the literate there is no personal contact between people can be reached through the buyers and the sellers under the advertisements and other forms of system of mail order selling, there written communication. are greater possibilities of mis- Advantages understanding and mistrust between the	 two.	 The	 buyers	 are	 not	 in	 a (i) Limited capital requirement:	Mail	 position to examine the products order business does not require heavy before buying and the sellers cannot expenditure on building and other pay	personal	attention	to	the	likes	and 2024-25 Chapter 10.indd   230 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM INTERNAL TRADE 231 dislikes	of	the	buyers	and	cannot	clear	 without postal facilities, this type of all their doubts through catalogues business has limited prospects. and advertisements. (ii) High promotion cost:	 The	mail	 Consumer Cooperative Store order business has to rely heavily on advertisements and other methods A consumer cooperative store is an of promotion in order to inform and organisation owned, managed and persuade the potential buyers to buy controlled by consumers themselves. their products. As a result, there is The	 objective	 of	 such	 stores	 is	 to heavy expenditure on promotion of reduce the number of middlemen the products. who increase the cost of produce, and (iii) No after sales service: In mail thereby provide service to the members. order selling, the buyers and sellers The	 cooperative	 stores	 generally may be located very far away from each buy in large quantity, directly from other and there is no personal contact manufacturers or wholesalers and sell between the two. As a result, there is them to the consumers at reasonable absence of after sales services which prices.	 Since	 the	 middleman	 are is so important for the satisfaction of eliminated or reduced, the members the customers. get products of good quality at cheaper (iv) No credit facilities: The	mail	order	 rates.	The	profits	earned	by	consumer houses do not provide credit facilities cooperative stores during a year to	the	buyers.	Thus,	customers	with	 are utilised for declaring bonus to limited means may not be interested members and for strengthening the in this type of trading. general reserves and general welfare (v) Delayed delivery:	 There	 is	 no	 funds or similar funds for social and immediate delivery of goods to the educational	benefits	of	the	members. customers, as receipt and execution of To	 start	 a	 consumer	 cooperative order	through	mail	takes	its	own	time. store, at least 10 people have to (vi) Possibility of abuse:	This	type	of	 come together and form a voluntary business provides greater possibility association and get it registered under of abuse to dishonest traders to cheat the	 Cooperative	 Societies	 Act.	 The the	customers	by	making	false	claims	 capital of a cooperative store is raised about the products or not honouring by	 issue	 of	 shares	 to	members.	 The the commitments made through hand management of the store is democratic bills or advertisements. and entrusted to an elected managing (vii) High dependence on postal committee where one man one vote is services:	 The	 success	 of	mail	 order	 the	rule.	The	liability	of	the	members	of business depends heavily on the a cooperative store is generally limited availability	of	efficient	postal	services	 to the extent of the capital contributed at	a	place.		But	in	a	vast	country	like	 by	them.	To	ensure	fair	management ours, where many places are still of funds, the accounts of the stores are 2024-25 Chapter 10.indd   231 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM 232 BUSINESS  STUDIES audited by the Registrar of Cooperative (vi) Convenient location: 	 The Societies	 or	 a	 person	 authorised	 by	 consumer cooperative stores are him/her. generally opened at convenient public places where the members and others Advantages can easily buy the products as per The	major	advantages	of	a	consumer	 their requirements. cooperative store are as follows: Limitations (i) Ease information: It is easy to form a consumer cooperative society. The	limitations	of	consumer	cooperative Any ten people can come together stores are given as below: to form a voluntary association and ( i )  Lack of initiative:  As the get themselves registered with the cooperative stores are managed by Registrar	of	Cooperative	Societies	by	 people	who	work	on	honorary	basis, completing certain formalities. there	 is	a	 lack	of	sufficient	 initiative (ii) Limited liability:	 The	 liability	 and	motivation	amongst	them	to	work of the members in a cooperative more effectively. store is limited to the extent of the (ii) Shortage of funds:	 The	primary capital contributed by them. Over source of funds for a cooperative and above that amount, they are not store is the money raised from liable personally to pay for the debts members	 by	 issue	 of	 shares.	 The of society, in case the liabilities are stores generally face shortage of funds greater than its assets. as	membership	is	limited.	This	comes (iii) Democratic management: in the way of growth and expansion of Cooperative societies are democratically the cooperative stores. managed through management (iii) Lack of patronage:	The	members committees which are elected by the of the cooperative stores generally do members. Each member has one vote, not patronise them regularly. As a irrespective of the number of shares result of this, the stores are not able held by him/her. to operate successfully. (iv) Lower prices: A cooperative store (iv) Lack of business training:	 The purchases goods directly from the people entrusted with the management manufacturers or wholesalers and of	cooperative	stores	lack	expertise	as sells them to members and others. they are not trained in running the Elimination of middlemen results in lower prices for the consumer goods stores	efficiently. to the members. (v)  Cash sales: Super Markets The	 consumer cooperative stores normally sell A	 super	market	 is	 a	 large	 retailing goods on cash basis. As a result, the business unit selling wide variety requirement	 for	 working	 capital	 is	 of consumer goods on the basis of reduced. low price appeal, wide variety and 2024-25 Chapter 10.indd   232 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM INTERNAL TRADE 233 assortment, self-service and heavy of	 retail	 stores	 because	 of	 bulk emphasis on merchandising appeal. purchasing, lower operational The	 goods	 traded	 are	 generally	 food	 cost,	and	low	profit	margins. products and other low priced, branded 	 (v)	 The	goods	are	sold	on	cash	basis and widely used consumer products only. such as grocery, utensils, clothes, 	(vi)	 The	super	markets	are	generally electronic appliances, household located at central locations to goods,	and	medicines.	Super	markets	 secure high turnover. are generally situated at the main shopping	 centres.	 Goods	 are	 kept	 Advantages on	 racks	with	 clearly	 labelled	 price	 The	following	are	the	merits	of	super and	quality	 tags	 in	such	stores.	The	 markets: customers move into the store to (i) One roof, low cost:	Super	markets pick	up	goods	of	their	requirements,	 offer a wide variety of products at low bring	them	to	the	cash	counter,	make	 cost	under	one	roof.	These	outlets	are, payment	and	take	home	the	delivery. therefore, not only convenient but also Super	markets	 are	 organised	 on departmental basis where customers economical	to	the	buyers	for	making can buy various types of goods under their purchases. one roof. However, as compared to (ii) Central location:	 The	 super departmental	 stores,	 these	markets	 markets	 are	 generally	 located	 in	 the do not offer certain services such as heart of the city. As a result, these free home delivery, credit facilities, are easily accessible to large number etc., and also do not appoint sales of people staying in the surrounding persons to convince customers about localities. the	quality	of	products.	Some	of	 the	 (iii) Wide selection:	 Super	markets important characteristics of a super keep	a	wide	variety	of	goods	of	different market	are	as	follows: designs, colour, etc., which enables the (i)	 A	super	market	generally	carries	 buyers	to	make	better	selection. a complete line of food items and (iv) No bad debts: As generally the groceries, in addition to non-food sales are made on cash basis, there convenience goods. are	no	bad	debts	in	super	markets. (ii)	 The	buyers	can	purchase	different	 (v) Benefits of being  large scale: A products as per their requirements super	market	is	a	large	scale	retailing under	one	roof	in	such	markets. store.	It	enjoys	all	the	benefits	of	large (iii)	 A	super	market	operates	on	the	 scale buying and selling because of principle	 of	 self-service.	 The	 which its operating costs are lower. distribution cost is, therefore, lower. Limitations (iv)	 The	 prices	 of	 the	 products	 are	 The	major	limitations	of	super	markets generally lower than other types are as follows: 2024-25 Chapter 10.indd   233 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM 234 BUSINESS  STUDIES (i) No credit:	Super	markets	sell	their	 area in which this concept is getting products on cash basis only. No credit popular in many parts of our country facilities are made available to the (particularly in the urban areas) is buyers.	This	restricts	the	purchasing	 the	case	of	Automated	Teller	Machines power	of	buyers	from	such	markets. (ATM)	 in	 the	 banking	 service.	 As (ii) No personal attention:	 Super	 the name suggests, these machines markets	work	on	the	principle	of	self-	 have altogether changed the concept service.	The	customers,	therefore,	do	 of	 banking	 and	made	 it	 possible	 to not get any personal attention. As a withdraw money at any time without result, such commodities that require visiting	any	branch	of	a	bank. personal attention by sales people Vending machines can be useful for cannot be handled effectively in super selling	pre-packed	brands	of	low	priced markets. products which have high turnover (iii) Mishandling of goods:	 Some	 and which are uniform in size and customers	handle	 the	 goods	 kept	 in	 weight. However, the initial cost of the	 shelf	 carelessly.	 This	may	 raise	 installing a vending machine and the costs	in	super	markets. expenditure on regular maintenance (iv) High overhead expenses:	Super	 and repair are quite high. Also market	incur	high	overhead	expenses.	 consumers cannot feel or see the product before buying and do not have As a result these have not been able the opportunity of returning unwanted to create low price appeal among the goods.	Apart	from	that,	special	packs customers. have to be developed for the machines. (v) Huge capital requirement: The	machines	have	to	be	made	reliable Establishing and running a super in their operations. In spite of these