Chapter 3 Private, Public and Global enterPrises LEARNING OBJECTIVES After studying this chapter, you should be able to: •	 explain the concept and characteristics of business; •	 explain the features of different forms of public enterprises viz., departmental, statutory corporations and government companies; •	 critically examine the changing role of the public sector; •	 explain the features of global enterprises; and •	 appreciate	the	benefits	of	joint	ventures. 2024-25 Chapter 3.indd   57 31-12-2020   11:54:45 58 BUSINESS  STUDIES Anita, a student of Class XI, was going through some newspapers. The headlines stared at her face, Government plans to disinvest its shares in a few companies. The next day there was another news item on one public sector company incurring heavy losses and the proposal for closing the same. In contrast to this, she read another item on how some of the companies under the private sector were doing so well. She was actually curious to know what these terms like public sector, disinvestment, privatisation meant. She learnt there are all kinds of business organisation-small or large, industrial or trading, privately owned or government owned existing in our country. These organisations affect our daily economic life and therefore become part of the Indian economy. Since the Indian economy consists of both privately owned and government owned business enterprises, it is known as a mixed economy. The Government of India has opted for a mixed economy where both private and government enterprises are allowed to operate. The economy, therefore, may be classified into two sectors, viz., private sector and public sector. Then there are businesses which operate in more than one country known as global enterprises. Therefore, you may have observed that all types of organisations are doing business in the country whether they are public, private or global. 3.1 IntroductIon cities and towns has been greatly reduced. This is because of plenty of You must have come across all types private courier services firms operating of business organisations in your in bigger towns. Then there are daily life. In your neighbourhood businesses which operate in more market, there are shops owned by sole than one country known as global proprietors or big retail organisations enterprises. Therefore, you may have run by a company. Then there are observed that all types of organisations people providing you services like are doing business in the country legal services, medical services, being whether they are public, private or owned by more than one person global. i.e., partnership firms. These are all privately owned organisations. Similarly, there are other offices 3.2 PrIvate Sector and PublIc or places of business which may Sector be owned by the government. For The private sector consists of example, Railways is an organisation business owned by individuals or wholly owned and managed by the a group of individuals, as you have government. The post office, in your learnt in the previous chapter. The locality is owned by the Post and various forms of organisation are Telegraph Department, Government sole proprietorship, partnership, of India, though our dependence on joint Hindu family, cooperative their postal services, particularly in and company. 2024-25 Chapter 3.indd   58 13-01-2021   11:15:54 PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND GLOBAL ENTERPRISES 59 The public sector consists of outside India. Thus, multinational various organisations owned and corporations or global enterprises managed by the government. These which operate in more than one organisations may either be partly or country gained entry into the Indian wholly owned by the central or state economy. Thus, we have public sector government. They may also be a part units, private sector enterprises and of the ministry or come into existence global enterprises coexisting in the by a Special Act of the Parliament. The Indian economy. government, through these enterprises participates in the economic activities 3.3 Forms oF orGanisinG Public of the country. sector enterPrises The government in its industrial policy resolutions, from time-to- Government’s participation in business time,	defines	the	area	of	activities	in	 and economic sectors of the country which the private sector and public needs some kind of organisational sector are allowed to operate. In the framework to function. You have Industrial Policy Resolution 1948, studied about the forms of business the	Government	of	India	had	specified	 organisation in the private sector the approach towards development of viz., sole proprietorship, partnership, the industrial sector. The roles of the Hindu	undivided	 family,	 cooperative private and public sector were clearly and company. defined	and	the	government	through	 In the public sector, as it grows, an various Acts and Regulations was important question arises in respect of overseeing the economic activities of how it is to be organised or what form both the private and public sector. of organisation it should take. The The Industrial Policy Resolution, 1956 government	has	a	major	role	to	play	in had	also	laid	down	certain	objectives	 the formation of the public sector. But for the public sector to follow so as the government acts through its people, to accelerate the rate of growth and its	 offices,	 employees	 and	 they	 take industrialisation. The public sector decisions on behalf of the government. was given a lot of importance but at For this purpose, public enterprises the same time mutual dependency were formed by the government to of public and private sectors was participate in the economic activities emphasised. The 1991 industrial policy of the country. They are expected was radically different from all the to contribute to the economic deveearlier policies where the government lopment of the country in today’s was deliberating disinvestment of liberalised, competitive world. These public sector and allowing greater public enterprises are owned by freedom to the private sector. At the the public and are accountable to same time, foreign direct investment the public through the Parliament. was invited from business houses They are characterised by public 2024-25 Chapter 3.indd   59 31-12-2020   11:54:45 60 BUSINESS  STUDIES Indian Economy Public Sector Private Sector Departmental Government Undertakings Companies Partnership Joint Cooperative Multinational Hindu Corporations Statutory Sole Family Corporation Properietorship Company Public Private (Ltd.) (Ltd.) ownership, public funds being used for 3.3.1 Departmental Undertakings its activities and public accountability. This is the oldest and most traditional A public enterprise may take form of organising public enterprises. any particular form of organisation These enterprises are established as depending upon the nature of its departments of the ministry and are operations and their relationship with considered part or an extension of the government. The suitability of a the ministry itself. The Government particular form of organisation would functions through these departments depend upon its requirements. At the and the activities performed by them same time, in accordance with general are an integral part of the functioning principles, any organisation in the public of the government. They have not sector should ensure organisational been constituted as autonomous or performance productivity and quality independent institutions and as such standards. are not independent legal entities. The forms of organisation which They act through the officers of a public enterprise may take are as the Government and its employees follows: are Government employees. These (i) Departmental undertaking undertakings may be under the central or the state government and (ii) Statutory corporation the rules of central/state government (iii) Government company are applicable. Examples of these 2024-25 Chapter 3.indd   60 31-12-2020   11:54:45 PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND GLOBAL ENTERPRISES 61 undertakings are railways and post  (i) These undertakings facilitate the and telegraph department. Parliament to exercise effective control over their operations; Features  (ii) These ensure a high degree of The  ma in  cha rac t e r i s t i c s  o f public accountability; Departmental undertakings are as  (iii) The revenue earned by the follows: enterprise goes directly to the (i) The funding of these enterprises treasury and hence is a source of come directly from the Govern- income for the Government; ment Treasury and are an annual  (iv) Where national security is appropriation from the budget concerned, this form is most of the Government. The revenue suitable since it is under the earned by these is also paid into direct control and supervision of the treasury; the concerned Ministry. (ii)	 They	 are	 subject	 to	 accounting and audit controls applicable to Limitations other Government activities; This form of organisation suffers from (iii) The employees of the enterprise serious drawbacks, some of which are are Government servants and as follows: their recruitment and conditions  (i) Departmental undertakings fail of service are the same as that of to provide flexibility, which is other employees directly under essential for the smooth  operation the Government. They are headed by Indian Administrative Service of business; (IAS)	 officers	 and	 civil	 servants	  (ii) The employees or heads of departwho are transferable from one ments of such undertakings are ministry to another; not allowed to take independent (iv) It is generally considered to be decisions, without the approval a	 major	 subdivision	 of	 the	 of the ministry concerned. This Government department and is leads to delays, in matters where subject	 to	 direct	 control	 of	 the	 prompt decisions are required; ministry;  (iii) These enterprises are unable (v) They are accountable to the to take advantage of business ministry since their management opportunities. The bureaucrat’s is directly under the concerned over-cautious and conservative ministry. approval does not allow them to take risky ventures; Merits  (iv) There is red tapism in day-to-day Departmental undertakings have operations and no action can be certain advantages which are as taken unless it goes through the follows: proper channels of authority; 2024-25 Chapter 3.indd   61 31-12-2020   11:54:45 62 BUSINESS  STUDIES (v) There is a lot of political inter- government has the ultimate ference through the ministry; financial	 responsibility	 and	has (vi) These organisations are usually the power to appropriate its insensitive to consumer needs profits.	At	the	same	time,	the	state and  do not provide adequate also has to bear the losses, if any; services to them.  (iii) A statutory corporation is a body corporate and can sue and be 3.3.2 Statutory Corporations sued, enter into contract and Statutory corporations are public acquire property in its own name; enterprises brought into existence by  (iv) This type of enterprise is usually a Special Act of the Parliament. The independently	financed.	It	obtains Act	defines	its	powers	and	functions,	 funds by borrowings from the rules and regulations governing its government or from the public employees and its relationship with through revenues, derived from government departments. sale of goods and services. It has This is a corporate body created the authority to use its revenues; by	the	legislature	with	defined	powers	  (v) A statutory corporation is not and functions and is financially subject	 to	 the	 same	 accounting independent with a clear control and audit procedures applicable over	 a	 specified	 area	 or	 a	 particular	 to government departments. It type of commercial activity. It is a is also not concerned with the corporate person and has the capacity central budget of the Government; of acting in its own name. Statutory  (vi) The employees of these enterprises corporations therefore have the power are not government or civil of the government and considerable servants and are not governed by amount of operating flexibility of government rules and regulations. private enterprises. The conditions of service of the employees are governed by the Features provisions of the Act itself. At Statutory corporations have certain times, some officers are taken distinct features, which are discussed from government departments, as below: on deputation, to head these (i) Statutory corporations are set up organisations. under an Act of Parliament and are governed by the provisions Merits of	 the	 Act.	 The	 Act	 defines	 the	 This	 form	 of	 organisation	 enjoys objects,	powers	and	privileges	of	 certain advantages in its working, a statutory corporation; which are as follows: (ii) This type of organisation is 	 (i)	 They	enjoy	independence	in	their wholly owned by the state. The functioning and a high degree of 2024-25 Chapter 3.indd   62 31-12-2020   11:54:45 PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND GLOBAL ENTERPRISES 63 operational	 flexibility.	 They	 are	  (iv) The Government has a practice free from undesirable government of appointing advisors to the regulation and control; Corporation Board. This curbs (ii) Since the funds of these organi- the freedom of the corporation sations do not come from the in entering into contracts and central budget, the government other decisions. If there is any generally does not interfere in disagreement, the matter is their	financial	matters,	including	 referred to the government for their income and receipts; final decisions. This further (iii) Since they are autonomous delays action. organisations they frame their own policies and procedures 3.3.3 Government Company within the powers assigned to A government company is established them by the Act. The Act may, under The Companies Act, 2013 however, provide few issues/ and is registered and governed by matters which require prior the provisions of The Act. These approval of a particular ministry; are established for purely business (iv) A statutory corporation is a purposes and in true spirit compete valuable instrument for economic with companies in the private sector. development. It has the power According to the section 2(45) of the of the government, combined Companies Act 2013, a government with the initiative of private company means any company in enterprises. which not less than 51 per cent of the paid up capital is held by the central Limitations government, or by any state government or partly by Central government This type of organisation suffers from and partly by one or more State several limitations, which are as governments and includes a company follows: which is a subsidiary of a government (i) In reality, a statutory corporation company. Under the Companies does	not	enjoy	as	much	operational	 Act 2013, there is no change in the flexibility as stated above. All definition	of	a	company.	All	provisions actions	are	subject	to	many	rules	 of the Act are applicable to government and regulations; companies	unless	otherwise	specified. (ii) Government  and po l i t i ca l A government company may be formed interference has always been as a private limited company or a public there	in	major	decisions	or	where	 limited company. There are certain huge funds are involved; provisions which are applicable to the (iii) Where there is dealing with public, appointment/retirement of directors rampant corruption exists; and other managerial personnel. 2024-25 Chapter 3.indd   63 31-12-2020   11:54:45 64 BUSINESS  STUDIES From the above it is clear that the  (vi) These companies are exempted government exercises control over the from the accounting and audit paid up share capital of the company. rules and procedures. An auditor The shares of the company are is appointed by the Central purchased in the name of the President Government and the Annual of India. Since the government is Report is to be presented in the	major	shareholder	and	exercises	 the Parliament or the State control over the management of Legislature; these companies, they are known as  (vii) The government company obtains government companies. its funds from government shareholdings and other private Features shareholders. It is also permitted to raise funds from the capital Gove rnment  compan ies  have market. certain characteristics which makes them distinct from other forms of Merits organisations. These are discussed as follows: Government	companies	enjoy	several (i) It is an organisation created under advantages, which are as follows: the Companies Act, 2013 or any  (i) A government company can other previous Company Law. be	 established	 by	 fulfilling	 the (ii)	 The	 company	 can	 file	 a	 suit	 in	 requirements of the Indian a court of law against any third Companies Act. A separate Act party and be sued; in the Parliament is not required; (iii) The company can enter into a  (ii) It has a separate legal entity, contract and can acquire property apart from the Government; in its own name; 	(iii)	 I t 	 enjoys	 autonomy	 in	 a l l (iv) The management of the company management decisions and takes is regulated by the provisions of actions according to business the Companies Act, like any other prudence; (iv) These companies by providing public limited company; goods and services at reasonable (v) The employees of the company prices are able to control the are appointed according to their market and curb unhealthy own rules and regulations as business practices. contained in the Memorandum and Articles of Association of Limitations the company. The Memorandum and Articles of Association are Despite the autonomy given to the main documents of the these companies, they have certain company,	containing	the	objects	 disadvantages: of the company and its rules and  (i) Since the Government is the regulations; only shareholder in some of the 2024-25 Chapter 3.indd   64 31-12-2020   11:54:46 PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND GLOBAL ENTERPRISES 65 companies, the provisions of the role	of	public	sector	was	redefined.	It Companies Act does not have was not supposed to play a passive role much relevance; but to actively participate and compete (ii) I t  e v a d e s  c o n s t i t u t i o n a l in the market with other private sector responsibility, which a company companies in the same industry. financed by the government They were also held accountable for should  have. It is not answerable losses and return on investment. If directly to the Parliament; a public sector was making losses (iii) The government being the sole continuously, it was referred to the shareholder, the management Board for Industrial and Financial and administration rests in the Reconstruction (BIFR) for complete hands of the government. The overhauling or shut down. Various main purpose of a government committees were set up to study company, registered like other the working of inefficient public companies, is defeated. sector units with reports on how to improve	 their	managerial	 efficiency 3.4 chanGinG role oF Public sector and	 profitability.	 The	 role	 of	 public At the time of Independence, it was sector is definitely not what was expected that the public sector envisaged in the early 1960s or 70s. enterprises would play an important (i) Development of infrastructure: role	in	achieving	certain	objectives	of	the	 The development of infrastructure is a economy either by direct participation prerequisite for industrialisation in any in business or by acting as a catalyst. country. In the pre-Independence period, The public sector would build up basic infrastructure was not developed infrastructure for other sectors of the and therefore, industrialisation economy and invest in key areas. The progressed at a very slow pace. The private sector was unwilling to invest process of industrialisation cannot in	 projects	 which	 required	 heavy	 be sustained without adequate investment and had long gestation transportation and communication periods. The government then took it facilities, fuel and energy, and basic upon itself to develop infrastructural and heavy industries. The private facilities and provide for goods and sector did not show any initiative to services essential for the economy. invest in heavy industries or develop The Indian economy is in a stage it in any manner. They did not have of transition. The Five Year Plans in trained personnel or finances to the initial stages of development gave immediately establish heavy industries lot of importance to the public sector. which was the requirement of the In the post–1990s, the new economic economy. policies, emphasised on liberalisation, It was only the government which privatisation and globalisation. The could mobilise huge capital, coordinate 2024-25 Chapter 3.indd   65 31-12-2020   11:54:46 66 BUSINESS  STUDIES industrial construction and train industries were deliberately set up. technicians and workforce. Rail, Four	major	 steel	 plants	were	 set	up road, sea and air transport was the in the backward areas to accelerate responsibility of the government, and economic development, provide their expansion has contributed to the employment to the workforce and pace of industrialisation and ensured develop ancilliary industries. This was future economic growth. The public achieved to some extent but there is sector enterprises were to operate in scope for a lot more. Development certain spheres. Investments were to of backward regions so as to ensure be made to: a regional balance in the country is (a) Give infrastructure to the core one	of	the	major	objectives	of	planned sector, which requires huge development. Therefore, the governcapital investment, complex and ment had to locate new enterprises upgraded technology, big and in backward areas and at the same effective organisation structures time prevent the mushrooming growth like steel plants, power generation of private sector units in already plants, civil aviation, railways, advanced areas. petroleum, state trading, coal, (iii) Economies of scale: Where etc; large scale industries are required to (b) Give a lead in investment to the be set up with huge capital outlay, core sector where private sector the public sector had to step in to enterprises are not functioning take advantage of economies of scale. in the desired direction, like Electric power plants, natural gas, fertilizers, pharmaceuticals, petroleum and telephone industries petro-chemicals, newsprint, are some examples of the public sector medium and heavy engineering; setting up large scale units. These (c) G i v e  d i r e c t i on  t o  fu tu r e units required a larger base to function investments	 like	 hotels,	 project	 economically which was only possible management, consultancies, with government resources and mass textiles, auto-mobiles, etc. scale production. (ii) Regional balance: The government (iv) Check over concentration of is responsible for developing all regions economic power: The public sector and states in a balanced way and acts as a check over the private removing regional disparties. Most of sector. In the private sector there the industrial progress was limited to are very few industrial houses which a few areas like the port towns in the would be willing to invest in heavy pre-Independence period. After 1951, industries with the result that wealth the government laid down in its Five gets concentrated in a few hands and Year Plans, that particular attention monopolostic practices are encouraged. would be paid to those regions which This gives rise to inequalities in income, were lagging behind and public sector which is detrimental to society. 2024-25 Chapter 3.indd   66 31-12-2020   11:54:46 PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND GLOBAL ENTERPRISES 67 The public sector is able to set public sector from 17 to 8 large industries which requires heavy (and then to 3): In the 1956 investment and thus the income and resolution on Industrial policy, benefits	 that	 accrue	 are	 shared	 by	 17 industries were reserved for a large of number of employees and the public sector. In 1991, only workers. This prevents concentration 8 industries were reserved for of wealth and economic power in the the public sector, they were private sector. restricted to atomic energy, arms (v) Import substitution: During the and communication, mining, second and third Five Year Plan period, and railways. In 2001, only India was aiming to be self-reliant three industries were reserved in many spheres. Obtaining foreign exclusively for the public sector. exchange was also a problem and it These are atomic energy, arms was	difficult	to	import	heavy	machinery	 and rail transport. This meant required for a strong industrial base. that the private sector could enter At that time, public sector companies all areas (except the three) and involved in heavy engineering which the public sector would have to would help in import substitution were compete with them. established. Simultaneously, several The public sector has played a public sector companies like STC and vital role in the development of the MMTC have played an important role economy.	However,	the	private	sector in expanding exports of the country. is also quite capable of contributing (vi) Government policy towards substantially to the nation building the public sector since 1991: The process. Therefore, both the public Government of India had introduced sector and the private sector need to four	major	reforms	in	the	public	sector	 be viewed as mutually complementary in its new industrial policy in 1991. parts of the national sector. Private The main elements of the Government sector units also have to assume policy are as follows: greater public responsibil it ies. •	 Restructure and revive potentially Simultaneously, the public sector viable PSUs needs to focus on achieving more in a •	 Close down PSUs, which cannot highly competitive market. be revived  (b) Disinvestment of shares of •	 Bring down governments equity in a select set of public sector all non-strategic PSUs to 26 per enterprises:  Disinvestment cent or lower, if necessary; and involves the sale of the equity •	 Fully protect the interest of shares to the private sector and workers. the	public.	The	objective	was	to (a) Reduction in the number of raise resources and encourage industries reserved for the wider participation of the general 2024-25 Chapter 3.indd   67 31-12-2020   11:54:46 68 BUSINESS  STUDIES public and workers in the the private sector: All public ownership of these enterprises. sector units were referred to the The government had taken a Board of Industrial and Financial decision to withdraw from the Reconst ruc t ion  to  dec ide industrial sector and reduce whether a sick unit was to be its equity in all undertakings. restructured or closed down. The It was expected that this would Board has reconsidered revival lead to improving managerial and rehabilitation schemes for performance and ensuring some cases and winding up financial discipline. But there for a number of units. There remains a lot to be done in is a lot of resentment amongst this area. workers of the units which are The	primary	objectives	of	privatising	 to be closed down. A National public sector enterprises are: Renewal Fund was set up by the •	 Releasing the large amount government to retrain or redeploy of public resources locked up retrenched labour and to provide in non-strategic Public Sector compensation to public sector Enterprises (PSEs), so that they employees seeking voluntary may be utilised on other social retirement. priority areas such as basic    There are many enterprises health, family welfare and primary which are sick and not capable education. of being revived as they have •	 Reducing the huge amount of accumulated huge losses. With public debt and interest burden; •	 Transferring the commercial public finances under intense risk to the private sector so that pressure, both central and state the funds are invested in able government	 are	 just	 not	 able projects; to sustain them much longer. •	 Free ing  these  enterpr ises The only option available to the from government control and government in such cases is to in t roduct ion  o f  corporate close down these undertakings governance; and after providing a safety net for the •	 In many areas where the public employees and workers. Resources sector had a monopoly, for under the National Renewal Fund example, telecom sector the have	not	been	sufficient	to	meet consumers have benefitted by the cost of Voluntary Separation more choices, lower prices and Scheme or Voluntary Retirement better quality of products and Scheme. services.  (d) Memorandum of Understanding: (c) Policy regarding sick units Improvement of performance to be the same as that for through a MoU (Memorandum 2024-25 Chapter 3.indd   68 31-12-2020   11:54:46 PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND GLOBAL ENTERPRISES 69 of Understanding) system by Features which managements are to be These corporations have distinct granted greater autonomy but features which distinguish them from held accountable for specified other private sector companies, public results. Under this system, public sector companies and public sector sector units were given clear enterprises. These are as follows: targets and operational autonomy (i) Huge capital resources: These for achieving those targets. The enterprises are characterised by MoU was between the particular possessing	 huge	 financial	 resources public sector unit and their and the ability to raise funds from administrative	ministries	defining	 different sources. They are able to their relationship and autonomy. tap funds from various sources. They may issue equity shares, debentures 3.5 Global enterPrises or bonds to the public. They are also At some time you must have come in	a	position	to	borrow	from	financial across products produced by Multi institutions and international banks. National Corporations (MNCs). In They	 enjoy	 credibility	 in	 the	 capital the last 2 decades or so. MNCs have market. Even investors and banks of played an important role in the Indian the host country are willing to invest in	 them.	 Because	 of	 their	 financial economy. They have become a common strength they are able to survive under feature of most developing economies all circumstances. in the world. MNCs as is evident (ii) Foreign collaboration: Global from what we see around us, are enterprises usually enter into gigantic corporations which have their agreements with Indian companies operations in a number of countries. pertaining to the sale of technology, They are characterised by their huge production of goods, use of brand size, large number of products, names	for	the	final	products,	etc.	These advanced technology, marketing MNCs may collaborate with companies strategies and network of operations in the public and private sector. There all over the world. Global enterprises are usually various restrictive clauses thus are huge industrial organisations in the agreement relating to transfer which extend their industrial and of technology, pricing, dividend marketing operations through a payments, tight control by foreign network of their branches in several technicians, etc. Big industrial houses countries.  These enterprises operate wanting to diversify and expand have in several areas producing multiple gained by collaborating with MNCs in products with their business strategy terms of patents, resources, foreign extending over a number of countries. exchange etc. But at the same time They	do	not	aim	at	maximising	profits	 these foreign collaborations have given from one or two products but instead rise to the growth of monopolies and spread their branches all over. concentration of power in few hands. 2024-25 Chapter 3.indd   69 31-12-2020   11:54:46 70 BUSINESS  STUDIES (iii) Advanced technology: These image also builds up and their market enterprises possess technological territory expands enabling them superiorities in their methods of to become international brands. production. They are able to conform They operate through a network of to international standards and quality subsidiaries,	 branches	 and	 affiliates specifications.	This	leads	to	industrial	 in host countries. Due to their giant progress of the country in which such size they occupy a dominant position corporations operate since they are in the market. able to optimally exploit local resources (vii) Centralised control: They have and raw materials. Computerisation their headquaters in their home and other inventions have come due country and exercise control over all to the technological advancements branches	and	subsidiaries.	However, provided by MNCs. this control is limited to the broad policy (iv) Product innovation: These framework of the parent company. enterprises are characterised by There is no interference in day-to-day having highly sophisticated research operations. and development departments engaged in the task of developing 3.6 Joint ventures new products and superior designs of existing products. Qualitative research Meaning requires huge investment which only Business organisations as you have global enterprises can afford. studied earlier can be of various (v) Marketing strategies:  The types private or government owned or marketing strategies of  global global enterprises. Now, any business companies are far more effective than organisation if it so desires can other companies. They use aggressive join	 hands	 with	 another	 business marketing strategies in order to organisation for mutual benefit. increase their sales in a short period. These two organisations may be They posses a more reliable and up- private, government-owned or a foreign to-date market information system. company. When two businesses Their advertising and sales promotion agree	 to	 join	 together	 for	 a	 common techniques are normally very effective. purpose	and	mutual	benefit,	 it	gives Since they already have carved out rise	 to	 a	 joint	 venture.	 Businesses a place for themselves in the global of	any	size	can	use	joint	ventures	to market, and their brands are well- strengthen long-term relationships or known, selling their products is not a to	collaborate	on	short	term	projects.	A problem. joint	venture	can	be	flexible	depending (vi) Expansion of market territory: upon the party’s requirements. These Their operations and activities extend need	 to	 be	 clearly	 stated	 in	 a	 joint beyond the physical boundaries of their venture	agreement	to	avoid	conflict	at own countries. Their international a later stage. 2024-25 Chapter 3.indd   70 31-12-2020   11:54:46 PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND GLOBAL ENTERPRISES 71 A	 joint	 venture	may	 also	 be	 the	 channels,	 technology	 or	 finance.	 In result of an agreement between two this	kind	of	a	joint	venture,	two	or	more businesses in different countries. In (parent) companies agree to share this case, there are certain provisions capital, technology, human resources, provided by the governments of the risks and rewards in the formation of two countries, which will have to be a new entity, under shared control. adhered to. In	India,	joint	venture	companies Thus,	we	 see	 that	 joint	 ventures	 are the best way of doing business. may mean many things, depending There are no separate laws for upon the context we are using it these	 joint	 ventures.	 The	 companies in.	 But	 in	 a	 broader	 sense,	 a	 joint	 incorporated in India are treated the venture is the pooling of resources and same as domestic companies. expertise by two or more businesses, to achieve a particular goal. The risks Joint Ventures are of two types — and rewards of the business are Contractual	joint	venture also shared. The reasons behind the Equity-based	joint	venture joint	 venture	 often	 include	 business expansion, development of new 3.6.1 Types of Joint Ventures products or moving into new markets, (i) Contractual Joint Venture (CJV): particularly in another country. It is In	a	contractual	joint	venture,	a	new becoming increasingly common for jointly-owned	 entity	 is	 not	 created. companies	 to	 create	 joint	 ventures	 There is only an agreement to work with other businesses/companies together. The parties do not share and form strategic alliances with ownership of the business but exercise them. The reasons for these alliances some elements of control in the may be complementary capabilities joint	 venture.	 A	 typical	 example and resources such as distribution of	 a	 contractual	 joint	 venture	 is	 a 2024-25 Chapter 3.indd   71 31-12-2020   11:54:46 72 BUSINESS  STUDIES franchisee relationship. In such a  (e) Shared prof i ts and losses relationship the key elements are: according to the agreement. (a) Two or more parties have a A	joint	venture	must	be	based	on	a common intention – of running memorandum of understanding signed a business venture; by both the parties, highlighting the basis	 of	 a	 joint	 venture	 agreement. (b) Each party brings some inputs; The terms should be thoroughly (c) Both parties exercise some discussed and negotiated to avoid control on the business venture; any legal complications at a later and stage. Negotiations and terms must (d) The re lat ionship is  not  a take into account the cultural and transact ion-to-transact ion legal background of the parties. The relationship but has a character joint	 venture	 agreement	must	 also of relatively longer duration. state that all necessary governmental approvals and licences will be obtained (ii) Equity-based Joint Venture (EJV): within	a	specified	period. An	 equity	 joint	 venture	 agreement is one in which a separate business 3.6.2	 Benefits entity,	 jointly	owned	by	 two	or	more parties, is formed in accordance with Business can achieve unexpected the agreement of the parties. The key gains	 through	 joint	 ventures	with	 a operative	factor	in	such	case	is	 joint	 partner. Joint ventures can prove to ownership by two or more parties. be	extremely	beneficial	for	both	parties The form of business entity may vary involved. One party may have strong —	company,	partnership	firm,	trusts,	 potential for growth and innovative limited liability partnership firms, ideas,	but	is	still	likely	to		benefit	from venture capital funds, etc. entering	into	a	joint	venture	because	it (a) There is an agreement to either enhances its capacity,  resources and create a new entity or for one of technical	expertise.	The	major	benefits of	joint	ventures	are	as	follows: the	parties	to	join	into	ownership of an existing entity; (i) Increased resources and capacity: Joining hands with another or teaming (b) Shared ownership by the parties up adds to existing resources and involved; capacity	 enabling	 the	 joint	 venture (c) Shared	management	of	the	jointly	 company to grow and expand more quickly and efficiently. The new owned entity; business	pools	in	financial and human (d) Shared responsibilities regarding resources and is able to face market capital investment and other challenges and take advantage of new financing	arrangements;	and opportunities. 2024-25 Chapter 3.indd   72 31-12-2020   11:54:46 PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND GLOBAL ENTERPRISES 73 (ii) Access to new markets and to get quality products for their global distribution networks: When a requirements. India is becoming an business enters into a joint venture important global source and extremely with a partner from another country, competitive in many products. it opens up a vast growing market. For There are many reasons for this, example, when foreign companies form low cost of raw materials and labour, joint venture companies in India they technically qualified workforce; gain access to the vast Indian market. management professionals, excellent Their products which have reached manpower in different cadres, like saturation point in their home markets lawyers, chartered accountants, can be easily sold in new markets. They can also take advantage of engineers, scientists. The international the established distribution channels partner thus, gets the products of i.e., the retail outlets in different local required quality and specifications markets. Otherwise, establishing their at a much lower cost than what is own retail outlets may prove to be prevailing in the home country. very expensive. (vi) Established brand name: When (iii) Access to technology: Technology two businesses enter into a joint is a major factor for most businesses venture, one of the parties benefits from to enter into joint ventures. Advanced the other’s goodwill which has already techniques of production leading to been established in the market. If the superior quality products saves a lot joint venture is in India and with an of time, energy and investment as Indian company, the Indian company they do not have to develop their own does not have to spend time or money technology. Technology also adds in developing a brand name for the to efficiency and effectiveness, thus product or even a distribution system. leading to reduction in costs. There is a ready market waiting for ( iv )  Innovation:  The markets the product to be launched. A lot of are increasingly becoming more investment is saved in the process. demanding in terms of new and innovative products. Joint ventures 3.7 Public Private PartnershiP (PPP) allow business to come up with something new and creative for The Public Private Partnership model the same market. Specially foreign allocates tasks, obligations and risks partners  can come up with innovative among the public and private partners products because of new ideas and in an optimal manner. The public technology. partners in PPP are Government (v) Low cost of production: When entities, i.e., ministries, government international corporations invest in departments, municipalities or India, they benefit immensely due to the state-owned enterprises. The private lower cost of production. They are able partners can be local or foreign 2024-25 Chapter 3.indd   73 13-01-2021   12:30:04 74 BUSINESS  STUDIES (international) and include businesses investment and transfer of assets that or	investors	with	technical	or	financial	 support the partnership in addition expertise	 relevant	 to	 the	 project.	 to social responsibility, environmental PPP also includes NGOs and/or awareness and local knowledge. The community-based organisations who private sector’s role in the partnership are the stakeholders directly affected is to make use of its expertise in by	 the	 project.	 PPP	 is,	 therefore,	 operations, managing tasks and defined as a relationship between innovation to run the business public and private entities in the efficiently. context of infrastructure and other Sectors in which PPPs have services. Under the PPP model, public been completed worldwide include power generation and distribution, sector plays an important role and water and sanitation, refuse disposal, ensures that the social obligations pipelines, hospitals, school buildings are	 fulfilled	 and	 sector	 reforms	 and	 and teaching facilities, stadiums, public investment are successfully air	 traffic	 control,	 prisons,	 railways, met. The government’s contribution roads, billing and other information to PPP is in the form of capital for technology systems, and housing. PPP Model Features •	 Contract with the private party to design and build public facility. •	 Facility	is	financed	and	owned	by	the	public	sector. •	 Key driver is the transfer of design and construction risk. Application •	 Suited	to	capital	projects	with	small	operating	requirement. •	 Suited	to	capital	projects	where	the	public	sector	wishes	to	retain	the	operating responsibility. Strengths •	 Transfer of design and construction risk. •	 Potential	to	accelerate	project. Weaknesses •	 Conflict	between	parties	may	arise	on	environmental	considerations •	 Does	not	attract	private	finance	easily. Example •	 Kundli Manesar Expressway Ltd.: In this 135 km expressway, land has been provided by the government and surface has been laid out by the company. 2024-25 Chapter 3.indd   74 31-12-2020   11:54:46 PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND GLOBAL ENTERPRISES 75 Key Terms Public sector Departmental undertaking Globalisation Public enterprises Government companies Global enterprises Statutory corporation Disinvestment Public Sector Undertakings Joint ventures Public accountability Public Private Partnership Privatisation SUMMARY Private sector and public sector: There are all kinds of business organisations — small or large, industrial or trading, privately owned or government owned existing in our country. These organisations affect our daily economic life and therefore, become part of the Indian economy. The government of India has opted for a mixed economy, where both private and government enterprises are allowed to operate. The economy, therefore, may be	classified	into	two	sectors	viz.,	private	sector	and	public	sector.	The	private sector consists of business owned by individuals or a group of individuals. Various	 forms	 of	 organisation	 are	 sole	 proprietorship,	 partnership,	 joint Hindu	family,	cooperative	and	company.	The	public	sector	consists	of	various organisations owned and managed by the government. These organisations may either be partly or wholly owned by the central or state government. Forms of organising public sector enterprises: Government’s participation in business and economic sectors of the country needs some kind of organisational framework to function. A public enterprise may take any particular form of organisation depending upon the nature of it’s operations and their relationship with the government. The suitability of a particular form of organisation would depend upon its requirements. The forms of organisation which a public enterprise may take are as follows: (i) Departmental undertaking (ii)  Statutory corporation (iii) Government company Departmental undertakings: These enterprises are established as departments of the ministry and are considered part or an extension of the ministry itself. The Government functions through these departments and the activities performed by them are an integral part of the functioning of the government. Statutory corporations: Statutory corporations are public enterprises brought	into	existence	by	a	Special	Act	of	the	Parliament.	The	Act	defines	its powers and functions, rules and regulations governing its employees and its 2024-25 Chapter 3.indd   75 13-01-2021   09:41:21 76 BUSINESS  STUDIES relationship with Government departments. This is a corporate body created by	legislature	with	defined	powers	and	functions	and	financially	independent with	a	clear	control	over	a	specified	area	or	a	particular	type	of	commercial activity. Government company: A Government company means any company in which not less than 51 percent of the paid up capital is held by the central government, or by any state governments or government or partly by central government and partly by one or more state governments and includes a company which is a subsidiary company of such a government company. Changing role of public sector: At the time of Independence, it was expected that the public sector enterprises would play an important role in achieving certain	 objectives	 of	 the	 economy	either	by	direct	participation	 in	business or by acting as a catalyst. The Indian economy is in a stage of transition. In the post 90’s period, the new economic policies emphasised liberalisation, privatisation	and	globalisation.	The	 role	of	 the	public	 sector	was	 redefined.