Chapter 8 SourceS of BuSineSS finance LEARNING OBJECTIVES After studying this chapter, you should be able to: •	 state	the	meaning,	nature	and	importance	of	business	finance; •	 classify	the	various	sources	of	business	finance; •	 evaluate	merits	and	limitations	of	various	sources	of	finance; •	 identify	the	international	sources	of	finance;	and •	 examine the factors that affect the choice of an appropriate source of	finance. 2024-25 Chapter 8.indd   172 9/2/2022   2:14:08 PM SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE 173 Mr.	Anil	Singh	has	been	running	a	restaurant	for	the	last	two	years.	The	excellent quality	of	food	has	made	the	restaurant	popular	in	no	time.	Motivated	by	the	success of	his	business,	Mr.	Singh	is	now	contemplating	the	idea	of	opening	a	chain	of similar	restaurants	at	different	places.	However,	the	money	available	with	him	from his	personal	sources	is	not	sufficient	to	meet	the	expansion	requirements	of	his business.	His	father	told	him	that	he	can	enter	into	a	partnership	with	the	owner	of another restaurant, who will bring in more funds but it would also require sharing of	profits	and	control	of	business.	He	is	also	thinking	of	getting	a	bank	loan.	He is worried and confused, as he has no idea as to how and from where he should obtain	additional	funds.	He	discusses	the	problem	with	his	friend	Ramesh,	who tells him about some other methods like issue of shares and debentures, which are	available	only	to	a	company	form	of	organisation.	He	further	cautions	him	that each	method	has	its	own	advantages	and	limitations	and	his	final	choice	should be	based	on	factors	like	the	purpose	and	period	for	which	funds	are	required.	He wants	to	learn	about	these	methods. 8.1 introduction needs	 of	 society.	 For	 carrying	 out This chapter provides an overview of various activities, business requires the various sources from where funds money.	Finance,	therefore,	is	called	the can be procured for starting as also for life	 blood	 of	 any	 business.	 The running	a	business.	It	also	discusses	 requirements of funds by business to the advantages and limitations of carry out its various activities is called various sources and points out the business	finance. factors that determine the choice of a A business cannot function unless suitable	source	of	business	finance. adequate funds are made available to It	is	important	for	any	person	who	 it.	The	initial	capital	contributed	by	the wants to start a business to know entrepreneur	is	not	always	sufficient	to about the different sources from take	care	of	all	financial	requirements where	money	can	be	raised.	It	is	also	 of	 the	 business.	 A	 business	 person, important to know the relative merits therefore, has to look for different other and demerits of different sources so sources from where the need for funds that choice of an appropriate source can	be	met.	A	clear	assessment	of	the can	be	made. financial	needs	and	the	identification of	various	sources	of	finance,	therefore, 8.2 M is	 a	 significant	 aspect	 of	 running	 a eaning, nature and Significance business	organisation. of BuSineSS finance The need for funds arises from the Business is concerned with the stage when an entrepreneur makes production and distribution of goods a	decision	to	start	a	business.	Some and services for the satisfaction of funds are needed immediately say for 2024-25 Chapter 8.indd   173 9/2/2022   2:14:08 PM 174 BUSINESS  STUDIES the purchase of plant and machinery, stock of material, bills receivables furniture,	 and	 other	 fixed	 assets.	 and for meeting current expenses Similarly,	 some	 funds	 are	 required	 like salaries, wages, taxes, and for day-to-day operations, say to rent. purchase raw materials, pay salaries to The amount of working capital employees,	etc.	Also	when	the	business	 required varies from one business expands,	it	needs	funds. concern to another depending on The	financial	needs	of	a	business	 various	factors.	A	business	unit	selling can be categorised as follows: goods on credit, or having a slow sales ( a) Fixed capital requirements:	 In	 turnover, for example, would require order to start business, funds more working capital as compared to a are required to purchase fixed concern selling its goods and services assets like land and building, plant on cash basis or having a speedier and machinery, and furniture turnover. and	 fixtures.	 This	 is	 known	 as	 The requirement for fixed and fixed	 capital	 requirements	 of	 the	 working capital increases with the enterprise.	The	 funds	required	 in	 growth	and	expansion	of	business.	At fixed assets remain invested in times additional funds are required for the business for a long period of upgrading the technology employed time.	Different	business	units	need	 so that the cost of production or varying amount of fixed capital operations	can	be	reduced.	Similarly, depending on various factors such larger funds may be required for as	 the	nature	of	business,	 etc.	A	 building higher inventories for the trading concern for example, may festive season or to meet current debts require	small	amount	of	fixed	capital	 or expand the business or to shift to a as compared to a manufacturing new	location.	It	is,	therefore,	important concern.	 Likewise,	 the	 need	 for	 to evaluate the different sources from fixed capital investment would where	funds	can	be	raised. be greater for a large enterprise, as compared to that of a small 8.3 claSSification of SourceS of enterprise. fundS (b) Working capital requirements: In	case	of	proprietary	and	partnership The financial requirements of concerns, the funds may be raised either an enterprise do not end with from personal sources or borrowings the	 procurement	 of	 fixed	 assets.	 from	 banks,	 friends	 etc.	 In	 case	 of No matter how small or large a company form of organisation, the business is, it needs funds for different	 sources	 of	 business	finance its	 day-to-day	 operations.	 This	 which are available may be categorised is known as working capital of as	given	in	Table	8.1 an enterprise, which is used for As shown in the table, the sources holding current assets such as of funds can be categorised using 2024-25 Chapter 8.indd   174 9/2/2022   2:14:08 PM SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE 175 2024-25 Chapter 8.indd   175 9/2/2022   2:14:08 PM Table 8.1    Classification of Sources of Funds 176 BUSINESS  STUDIES different	 basis	 viz.,	 on	 the	 basis	 of	 often	 need	 short-term	 financing	 for the period, source of generation and the	 interim	period	 between	 seasons. the	ownership.	A	brief	explanation	of	 Wholesalers and manufacturers with these	classifications	and	the	sources	 a major portion of their assets tied is provided as follows: up in inventories or receivables also require large amount of funds for a 8.3.1 Period Basis  short	period. On the basis of period, the different sources of funds can be categorised 8.3.2 Ownership Basis into	three	parts.	These	are	long-term	 On the basis of ownership, the sources sources, medium-term sources and can	be	classified	into	‘owner’s	funds’ short-term	sources. and	‘borrowed	funds’.	Owner’s	funds The	 long-term	 sources	 fulfil	 the	 means funds that are provided by the financial	requirements	of	an	enterprise	 owners of an enterprise, which may for a period exceeding 5 years and be a sole trader or partners or include sources such as shares and shareholders	 of	 a	 company.	 Apart debentures, long-term borrowings and from	 capital,	 it	 also	 includes	 profits loans	from	financial	institutions.	Such financing	is	generally	required	for	the	 reinvested	 in	 the	 business.	 The acquisition	 of	 fixed	 assets	 such	 as	 owner’s	 capital	 remains	 invested	 in equipment,	plant,	etc.	 the business for a longer duration Where the funds are required for a and is not required to be refunded period of more than one year but less during	the	life	period	of	the	business. than	five	years,	medium-term	sources	 Such	capital	forms	the	basis	on	which of	 finance	 are	 used.	 These	 sources	 owners acquire their right of control of include borrowings from commercial management.	 Issue	 of	 equity	 shares banks,	public	deposits,	lease	financing	 and retained earnings are the two and	loans	from	financial	institutions.	 important	sources	from	where	owner’s Short-term	funds	are	those	which	 funds	can	be	obtained. are required for a period not exceeding ‘Borrowed	 funds’	 on	 the	 other one	 year.	 Trade	 credit,	 loans	 from	 hand, refer to the funds raised through commercial banks and commercial loans	 or	 borrowings.	 The	 sources papers are some of the examples of the for raising borrowed funds include sources that provide funds for short loans from commercial banks, loans duration.	 from	 financial	 institutions,	 issue	 of Short-term	 financing	 is	 most	 debentures, public deposits and trade common for financing of current credit.	Such	sources	provide	funds	for assets such as accounts receivable a	 specified	 period,	 on	 certain	 terms and	inventories.	Seasonal	businesses	 and conditions and have to be repaid that must build inventories in after	the	expiry	of	that	period.	A	fixed anticipation of selling requirements rate of interest is paid by the borrowers 2024-25 Chapter 8.indd   176 9/2/2022   2:14:08 PM SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE 177 on	such	funds.	At	times	it	puts	a	lot	 8.4 SourceS of finance of burden on the business as payment of interest is to be made even when A business can raise funds from the earnings are low or when loss is various	sources.	Each	of	the	source	has unique characteristics, which must be incurred.	Generally,	 borrowed	 funds	 properly understood so that the best are provided on the security of some available source of raising funds can fixed	assets. be	identified.	There	is	not	a	single	best source	of	 funds	 for	all	organisations. 8.3.3 Source of Generation Basis Depending	on	the	situation,	purpose, Another basis of categorising the cost and associated risk, a choice may sources of funds can be whether the be	made	about	the	source	to	be	used. funds are generated from within the For	 example,	 if	 a	 business	wants	 to organisation	or	from	external	sources.	 raise	 funds	 for	meeting	 fixed	 capital Internal	 sources	 of	 funds	 are	 those	 requirements, long term funds may that are generated from within the be required which can be raised in business.	 A	 business,	 for	 example,	 the form of owned funds or borrowed can generate funds internally by funds.	Similarly,	 if	 the	purpose	 is	 to accelerating collection of receivables, meet the day-to-day requirements of disposing of surplus inventories and business, the short term sources may ploughing	back	its	profit.	The	internal	 be	tapped.	A	brief	description	of	various sources	of	funds	can	fulfill	only	limited	 sources, along with their advantages needs	of	the	business. and	limitations	is	given	below. External sources of funds include those sources that lie outside an 8.4.1 Retained Earnings organisation, such as suppliers, A company generally does not lenders,	 and	 investors.	When	 large	 distribute all its earnings amongst the amount of money is required to be shareholders	as	dividends.	A	portion raised, it is generally done through of the net earnings may be retained the	use	of	external	sources.	External	 in	the	business	for	use	in	the	future. funds may be costly as compared to This	is	known	as	retained	earnings.	It those	raised	through	internal	sources.	 is	a	source	of	internal	financing	or	selfIn	some	cases,	business	is	required	to	 financing	or	‘ploughing	back	of	profits’. mortgage its assets as security while The	profit	available	for	ploughing	back obtaining	funds	from	external	sources.	 in an organisation depends on many Issue	of	debentures,	borrowing	 from	 factors	like	net	profits,	dividend	policy commercial banks and financial and	age	of	the	organisation. institutions and accepting public Merits deposits are some of the examples of external sources of funds commonly The merits of retained earning as a used	by	business	organisations.		 source	of	finance	are	as	follows: 2024-25 Chapter 8.indd   177 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM 178 BUSINESS  STUDIES (i)	 Retained	earnings	is	a	permanent	 creditors’	or	‘accounts	payable’.	Trade source of funds available to an credit is commonly used by business organisation; organisations as a source of short(ii)	 It	does	not	involve	any	explicit	cost	 term	financing.	It	is	granted	to	those in the form of interest, dividend or customers who have reasonable floatation	cost;	 amount of financial standing and (iii) As the funds are generated internally, there is a greater goodwill.	 The	 volume	 and	 period	 of degree of operational freedom and credit extended depends on factors flexibility; such as reputation of the purchasing (iv)	 It	 enhances	 the	 capacity	 of	 the	 firm,	 financial	 position	 of	 the	 seller, business to absorb unexpected volume of purchases, past record of losses; payment and degree of competition in (v)	 It	may	 lead	 to	 increase	 in	 the	 the	market.	Terms	of	trade	credit	may market price of the equity shares vary from one industry to another and of	a	company. from	 one	 person	 to	 another.	 A	 firm may also offer different credit terms to Limitations different customers. Retained	earning	as	a	source	of	funds has the following limitations: Merits (i) Excessive ploughing back may The important merits of trade credit cause dissatisfaction amongst the are as follows: shareholders as they would get  (i) Trade credit is a convenient and lower	dividends;	 continuous	source	of	funds; (ii)	 It	is	an	uncertain	source	of	funds as the profits of business are  (ii) Trade credit may be readily fluctuating; available in case the credit (iii) The opportunity cost associated worthiness of the customers is with these funds is not recognised known	to	the	seller; by	many	firms.	This	may	lead	to	  (iii) Trade credit needs to promote the sub-optimal	use	of	the	funds. sales	of	an	organisation; (iv)	 If	 an	 organisation	 wants	 to 8.4.2 Trade Credit increase its inventory level in Trade credit is the credit extended order to meet expected rise in the by one trader to another for the sales volume in the near future, purchase	of	goods	and	services.	Trade	 it	may	use	trade	credit	to,	finance credit facilitates the purchase of the	same; supplies	without	immediate	payment.	 	 (v)	 It	 does	 not	 create	 any	 charge Such	 credit	 appears	 in	 the	 records	 on	 the	 assets	 of	 the	 firm	while of	 the	 buyer	 of	 goods	 as	 ‘sundry	 providing funds. 2024-25 Chapter 8.indd   178 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE 179 Limitations  (b) Providing information about credit Trade credit as a source of funds has worthiness	 of	 prospective	 client’s certain limitations, which are given etc.,	 Factors	 hold	 large	 amounts as follows: of information about the trading (i)	 Availability	 of	 easy	 and	 flexible	 histories	 of	 the	 firms.	 This	 can trade credit facilities may induce be valuable to those who are a	firm	to	indulge	in	overtrading,	 using factoring services and can which may add to the risks of the thereby avoid doing business with firm;	 customers having poor payment (ii) Only limited amount of funds can record.	 Factors	 may	 also	 offer be	generated	through	trade	credit; relevant consultancy services in the (iii)	 It	 is	 generally	 a	 costly	 source	 of	 areas	of	finance,	marketing,	etc. funds as compared to most other The factor charges fees for sources	of	raising	money. the	 services	 rendered.	 Factoring appeared	 on	 the	 Indian	 financial 8.4.3 Factoring scene only in the early nineties as	a	result	of	RBI	 initiatives.	The Factoring	is	a	financial	service	under	 organisations that provides such which	 the	 ‘factor’	 renders	 various	 services	 include	SBI	 Factors	 and services which includes: Commercial	Services	Ltd.,	Canbank (a)	Discounting	of	bills	(with	or	without	 Factors	Ltd.,	Foremost	Factors	Ltd., recourse) and collection of the State	Bank	of	India,	Canara	Bank, client’s	 debts.	 Under	 this,	 the	 Punjab National Bank, Allahabad receivables on account of sale of Bank.	 In	 addition,	 many	 nongoods or services are sold to the banking finance companies and factor	 at	 a	 certain	 discount.	 The	 other agencies provide factoring factor becomes responsible for all service. credit control and debt collection from the buyer and provides Merits protection against any bad debt The merits of factoring as a source of losses	 to	 the	 firm.	 There	 are	 two	 finance	are	as	follows: methods of factoring — recourse  (i) Obtaining funds through factoring and	non-recourse.	Under	recourse	 is	cheaper	than	financing	through factoring, the client is not protected other	means	such	as	bank	credit; against	the	risk	of	bad	debts.	On	  (ii) With cash flow accelerated by the other hand, the factor assumes factoring, the client is able to meet the entire credit risk under non- his/her liabilities promptly as and recourse	factoring	i.e.,	full	amount	 when	these	arise; of invoice is paid to the client in the 	(iii)	 Factoring	 as	 a	 source	 of	 funds event	of	the	debt	becoming	bad.	 is	flexible	and	ensures	a	definite 2024-25 Chapter 8.indd   179 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM 180 BUSINESS  STUDIES pattern	of	cash	inflows	from	credit	 arrangements are given in the lease sales.	 It	 provides	 security	 for	 a	 contract.	At	the	end	of	the	lease	period, debt	that	a	firm	might	otherwise	 the	asset	goes	back	to	the	lessor.	Lease be	unable	to	obtain; finance	provides	an	important	means (iv)	 It	does	not	create	any	charge	on	 of	modernisation	and	diversification	to the	assets	of	the	firm; the	firm.	Such	type	of	financing	is	more (v) The client can concentrate on prevalent in the acquisition of such other functional areas of business assets as computers and electronic as the responsibility of credit equipment which become obsolete control is shouldered by the quicker because of the fast changing factor. technological	 developments.	While making the leasing decision, the cost Limitations of leasing an asset must be compared with	the	cost	of	owning	the	same. The limitations of factoring  as a source of	finance	are	as	follows: Merits (i) This source is expensive when the invoices are numerous and The	important	merits	of	lease	financing smaller	in	amount; are as follows: (ii) The advance finance provided  (i)	 It	enables	the	lessee	to	acquire	the by the factor firm is generally asset	with	a	lower	investment; available at a higher interest cost 	 (ii)	 Simple	 documentation	makes	 it than	the	usual	rate	of	interest; easier	to	finance	assets; (iii) The factor is a third party to 	(iii)	 Lease	rentals	paid	by	the	lessee the customer who may not feel are deductible for computing comfortable	while	dealing	with	it. taxable	profits; (iv)	 It	 provides	 finance	 without diluting the ownership or control 8.4.4 Lease Financing of	business; A lease is a contractual agreement  (v) The lease agreement does not whereby	one	party	i.e.,	the	owner	of	an	 affect the debt raising capacity of asset grants the other party the right an	enterprise; to use the asset in return for a periodic  (vi) The risk of obsolescence is borne payment.	In	other	words	it	is	a	renting	 by	the	lesser.	This	allows	greater of	an	asset	for	some	specified	period.	 flexibility	to	the	lessee	to	replace The owner of the assets is called the the asset. ‘lessor’	while	the	party	that	uses	the	 Limitations assets	 is	 known	 as	 the	 ‘lessee’	 (see Box	A).	The	lessee	pays	a	fixed	periodic	 The	limitations	of	lease	financing	are amount called lease rental to the lessor given as below: for	 the	 use	 of	 the	 asset.	 The	 terms	  (i) A lease arrangement may impose and conditions regulating the lease certain restrictions on the use 2024-25 Chapter 8.indd   180 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE 181 of	 assets.	 For	 example,	 it	may	  (iii)	 It	may	 result	 in	 higher	 payout not allow the lessee to make any obligation in case the equipment alteration	or	modification	 in	the	 is not found useful and the lessee asset;	 opts for premature termination of the	lease	agreement;	and (ii) The normal business operations  (iv) The lessee never becomes the may be affected in case the lease owner	of	the	asset.	It	deprives	him is	not	renewed;	 of	the	residual	value	of	the	asset. Box A The Lessors 1. Specialised leasing companies: There are about 400-odd large companies which have an organisational focus on leasing, and hence, are known as leasing	companies. 2. Banks and bank-subsidiaries:	 In	February	1994,	 the	RBI	allowed	banks to	directly	enter	leasing.	Till	then,	only	bank	subsidiaries	were	allowed	to engage	in	leasing	operations,	which	was	regarded	by	the	RBI	as	a	non-banking activity. 3.	 Specialised	financial	institutions:	A	number	of	financial	institutions,	at the	Central	as	well	as	the	State	level	in	India,	use	the	lease	instrument	along with	traditional	financing	instruments.	Significantly,	the	ICICI	is	one	of	the pioneers	in	Indian	leasing. 4. Manufacturer-lessors: As competition forces the manufacturer to add value to	his	sales,	he	finds	the	best	way	to	sell	the	product	on	lease.	Vendor	leasing is	gaining	increasing	importance.	Presently,	vendors	of	automobiles,	consumer durables,	etc.,	have	alliances	or	joint	ventures	with	leasing	companies	to	offer lease	finance	against	their	products. The Lessees 1. Public sector undertakings: This market has witnessed a good rate of growth in	the	past.	There	is	an	increasing	number	of	both	centrally	as	well	as	Stateowned	entities	which	have	resorted	to	lease	financing. 2. Mid-market companies:	The	mid-market	companies	(i.e.,	companies	with reasonably	good	creditworthiness	but	with	lower	public	profile)	have	resorted to	lease	financing	basically	as	an	alternative	to	bank/institutional	financing. 3. Consumers:	Recent	bad	experience	with	corporate	financing	has	focussed attention	 towards	 retail	 funding	of	 consumer	durables.	For	 instance,	 car leasing	is	a	big	market	in	India	today. 4. Government deptts. and authorities: One of the latest entrants in leasing	markets	 is	 the	 government	 itself.	 Recently	 the	 Department	 of Telecommunications	 of	 the	 central	 government	 took	 the	 lead	 by	 floating tenders	for	lease	finance	worth	about	`	1000	crores. 2024-25 Chapter 8.indd   181 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM 182 BUSINESS  STUDIES 8.4.5 Public Deposits  (iv) As the depositors do not have The deposits that are raised by voting rights, the control of the organisations directly from the public company is not diluted. are	known	as	public	deposits.	Rates of interest offered on public deposits Limitations are usually higher than that offered The major limitation of public deposits on	bank	deposits.	Any	person	who	is	 are as follows: interested in depositing money in an 	 (i)	 New	companies	generally	find	 it organisation	 can	 do	 so	 by	 filling	up	 difficult	 to	 raise	 funds	 through a	 prescribed	 form.	 The	 organisation	 public	deposits; in return issues a deposit receipt as 	 (ii)	 It	is	an	unreliable	source	of	finance acknowledgment	 of	 the	 debt.	 Public	 as the public may not respond deposits can take care of both medium when	the	company	needs	money; and	short-term	financial	requirements	  (iii) Collection of public deposits may of	 a	 business.	 The	 deposits	 are	 prove	difficult,	particularly	when beneficial to both the depositor as the size of deposits required is well	as	to	the	organisation.	While	the	 large. depositors get higher interest rate than that offered by banks, the cost of 8.4.6 Commercial Paper deposits to the company is less than the	 cost	 of	 borrowings	 from	 banks.	 Commercial Paper (CP) is an unsecured Companies generally invite public money market instrument issued in deposits	for	a	period	upto	three	years.	 the	form	of	a	promissory	note.	It	was The acceptance of public deposits is introduced	in	India	in	1990	for	enabling regulated	by	the	Reserve	Bank	of	India.	 highly rated corporate borrowers to diversify their sources of short-term Merits borrowings and to provide an additional instrument	to	investors.	Subsequently, The merits of public deposits are: primary	dealers	and	all-India	financial (i) The procedure of obtaining institutions were also permitted to deposits is simple and does not contain restrictive conditions issue CP to enable them to meet their as are generally there in a loan short-term funding requirements for agreement; their	operations.	Individuals,	banking (ii) Cost of  publ ic deposits is companies, other corporate bodies generally lower than the cost (registered	 or	 incorporated	 in	 India) of borrowings from banks and and unincorporated bodies, Nonfinancial	institutions;	 Resident	 Indians	 (NRIs)	 and	Foreign (iii) Public deposits do not usually Institutional	 Investors	 (FIIs)	 etc.	 can create any charge on the assets of invest	 in	CPs.	CP	 can	 be	 issued	 for the	company.	The	assets	can	be	 maturities between a minimum of 7 used as security for raising loans days and a maximum of up to one year from	other	sources; from the date of issue in denominations 2024-25 Chapter 8.indd   182 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE 183 of	 Rs.5	 lakh	 or	 multiples	 thereof.	  (iii) C o m m e r c i a l  p a p e r  i s  a n However,	the	maturity	date	of	the	CP	 impersonal	method	of	financing. should not go beyond the date up to As such if a firm is not in a which the credit rating of the issuer position to redeem its paper is	valid.		 due to financial difficulties, extending the maturity of a CP is Merits not	possible. (i) A commercial paper is sold on 8.4.7 Issue of Shares an unsecured basis and does not contain	any	restrictive	conditions; The capital obtained by issue of shares (ii) As it is a freely transferable is	known	as	share	capital.	The	capital instrument,	it	has	high	liquidity; of a company is divided into small (iii)	 It	provides	more	funds	compared	 units	 called	 shares.	Each	 share	has to	 other	 sources.	Generally,	 the	 its	 nominal	 value.	 For	 example,	 a cost	of	CP	to	the	issuing	firm	is	 company can issue 1,00,000 shares lower than the cost of commercial of	 Rs.	10	 each	 for	 a	 total	 value	 of bank	loans; Rs.	 10,00,000.	 The	 person	 holding (iv) A commercial paper provides a the	 share	 is	 known	 as	 shareholder. continuous	source	of	funds.	This	 There are two types of shares  normally is because their maturity can be issued	 by	 a	 company.	 These	 are tailored to suit the requirements equity	shares	and	preference	shares. of	 the	 issuing	 firm.	 Further,	 The money raised by issue of equity maturing commercial paper shares is called equity share capital, can be repaid by selling new while the money raised by issue of commercial	paper; preference shares is called preference (v) Companies can park their excess share	capital. funds in commercial paper  (a) Equity Shares thereby earning some good return   Equity shares is the most on the same. important source of raising long term	capital	by	a	company.	Equity Limitations shares represent the ownership of (i)	 Only	financially	sound	and	highly	 a company and thus the capital rated firms can raise money raised by issue of such shares through	commercial	papers.	New	 is known as ownership capital and	moderately	 rated	 firms	 are or	 owner’s	 funds.	 Equity	 share not in a position to raise funds by capital is a prerequisite to the this	method; creation	 of	 a	 company.	 Equity (ii) The size of money that can be shareholders	 do	 not	 get	 a	 fixed raised through commercial paper dividend but are paid on the is limited to the excess liquidity basis	of	earnings	by	the	company. available with the suppliers of They	are	referred	to	as	 ‘residual funds at a particular	time; owners’	 since	 they	 receive	what 2024-25 Chapter 8.indd   183 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM 184 BUSINESS  STUDIES is left after all other claims on 	(vi)	 D emoc r a t i c 	 c on t r o l 	 o v e r the	company’s	income	and	assets	 management of the company is have	 been	 settled.	 They	 enjoy	 assured due to voting rights of the reward as well as bear the equity	shareholders. risk	of	ownership.	Their	liability, however, is limited to the extent of Limitations capital contributed by them in the company.	Further,	through	their	 The major limitations of raising funds right to vote, these shareholders through issue of equity shares are as have a right to participate in the follows: management	of	the	company.  (i)	 Investors	who	want	steady	income may not prefer equity shares Merits as	 equity	 shares	 get	 fluctuating The important merits of raising funds returns; through issuing equity shares are  (ii) The cost of equity shares is given as below: generally more as compared to (i) Equity shares are suitable for the cost of raising funds through investors who are willing to other	sources; assume	risk	for	higher	returns; 	(iii)	 Issue	of	additional	equity	shares (ii) Payment of dividend to the equity dilutes the voting power, and shareholders	is	not	compulsory.	 earnings of existing equity Therefore, there is no burden on shareholders; the	company	in	this	respect;  (iv) More formalities and procedural (iii) Equity capital serves as permanent delays are involved while raising capital as it is to be repaid only funds through issue of equity at the time of liquidation of a share. company.	 As	 it	 stands	 last	 in	  (b) Preference Shares the list of claims, it provides a   The capital raised by issue cushion for creditors, in the event of preference shares is called of	winding	up	of	a	company; preference	 share	 capital.	 The (iv) Equity capital provides credit preference shareholders enjoy worthiness to the company and a preferential position over confidence to prospective loan equity shareholders in two ways: providers; (i)	receiving	a	fixed	rate	of	dividend, (v)	 Funds	 can	 be	 raised	 through	 out of the net profits of the equity issue without creating company, before any dividend is any charge on the assets of declared	for	equity	shareholders; the	 company.	 The	 assets	 of	 a	 and (ii) receiving their capital company are, therefore, free to after	the	claims	of	the	company’s be mortgaged for the purpose of creditors have been settled, at borrowings, if	the	need	be; the	 time	of	 liquidation.	 In	other 2024-25 Chapter 8.indd   184 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE 185 words, as compared to the equity  (v) Preference shareholders have a shareholders, the preference preferential right of repayment shareholders have a preferential over equity shareholders in the claim over dividend and repayment event	of	liquidation	of	a	company; of	 capital.	 Preference	 shares	  (vi) Preference capital does not create resemble debentures as they any sort of charge against the bear	 fixed	 rate	 of	 return.	 Also	 assets	of	a	company. as the dividend is payable only at the discretion of the directors Limitations and	only	out	of	profit	after	tax,	to	 The major limitations of preference that extent, these resemble equity shares	as	source	of	business	finance shares.	Thus,	preference	shares	 are as follows: have some characteristics of both  (i) Preference shares are not suitable equity	 shares	 and	 debentures.	 for those investors who are willing Preference shareholders generally to take risk and are interested in do	not	enjoy	any	voting	rights.	A	 higher	returns; company can issue different types  (ii) Preference capital dilutes the of	preference	shares	(see	Box	B). claims of equity shareholders over assets	of	the	company; Merits  (iii) The rate of dividend on preference shares is generally higher than The merits of preference shares are the	rate	of	interest	on	debentures; given as follows:  (iv) As the dividend on these shares is (i) Pre ference shares prov ide to be paid only when the company reasonably steady income in the earns	profit,	there	is	no	assured form	of	fixed	 rate	of	 return	and	 return	 for	 the	 investors.	 Thus, safety	of	investment;	 these shares may not be very (ii) Preference shares are useful for attractive	to	the	investors; those	 investors	who	want	 fixed  (v) The dividend paid is not deductible rate of return with comparatively from	 profits	 as	 expense.	 Thus, low	risk;	 there is no tax saving as in the (iii)	 It	 does	 not	 affect	 the	 control	 case	of	interest	on	loans. of equity shareholders over the management as preference 8.4.8 Debentures shareholders	 don’t	 have	 voting	 Debentures 	 are 	 an	 important rights;	 instrument for raising long term debt (iv)	 Payment	of	fixed	rate	of	dividend	 capital.	 A	 company	 can	 raise	 funds to preference shares may enable through issue of debentures, which a company to declare higher bear	 a	 fixed	 rate	 of	 interest.	 The rates of dividend for the equity debenture issued by a company is an shareholders	in	good	times; acknowledgment that the company 2024-25 Chapter 8.indd   185 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM 186 BUSINESS  STUDIES has borrowed a certain amount of Merits money, which it promises to repay at a	future	date.	Debenture	holders	are,	 The merits of raising funds through therefore, termed as creditors of the debentures are given as follows: company.	Debenture	holders	are	paid	 	 (i)	 It	 is	 preferred	 by	 investors	who a	 fixed	 stated	 amount	 of	 interest	 at	 want	fixed	income	at	lesser	risk; specified	 intervals	 say	 six	months	 or	 	 (ii)	 Debentures	are	fixed	charge	funds one	 year.	 Public	 issue	 of	 debentures	 and	do	not	participate	in	profits requires that the issue be rated by a of	the	company; credit	rating	agency	like	CRISIL	(Credit	  (iii) The issue of debentures is suitable Rating	 and	 Information	 Services	 of	 in the situation when the sales India	Ltd.)	on	aspects	like	track	record	 and	earnings	are	relatively	stable; of	the	company,	 its	profitability,	debt	 (iv)  As debentures do not carry servicing capacity, credit worthiness voting	 rights,	 financing	 through and	 the	 perceived	 risk	 of	 lending.	 A company can issue different types of debentures does not dilute debentures	(see	Box	C	and	D).	Issue	of	 control of equity shareholders on Zero	Interest	Debentures	 (ZID)	which	 management; do not carry any explicit rate of interest (v)	 	 Financing	through	debentures	is has also become popular in recent less costly as compared to cost of years.	The	difference	between	the	face	 preference or equity capital as the value of the debenture and its purchase interest payment on debentures is price	is	the	return	to	the	investor.	 tax	deductible. Box B Types of Preference Shares 1. Cumulative and Non-Cumulative: The preference shares which enjoy the right to accumulate unpaid dividends in the future years, in case the same is	not	paid	during	a	year	are	known	as	cumulative	preference	shares.	On the other hand, on non-cumulative shares, dividend is not accumulated if it	is	not	paid	in	a	particular	year. 2. Participating and Non-Participating: Preference shares which have a right to participate in the further surplus of a company shares which after dividend at a certain rate has been paid on equity shares are called participating	preference	shares.	The	non-participating	preference	are	such which	do	not	enjoy	such	rights	of	participation	in	the	profits	of	the	company. 3. Convertible and Non-Convertible: Preference shares that can be converted into	equity	shares	within	a	specified	period	of	time	are	known	as	convertible preference	shares.	On	the	other	hand,	non-convertible	shares	are	such	that cannot	be	converted	into	equity	shares. 2024-25 Chapter 8.indd   186 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE 187 Limitations 8.4.9 Commercial Banks Debentures	 as	 source	 of	 funds	 has	 Commercial banks occupy a vital certain	 limitations.	 These	 are	 given	 position as they provide funds for as follows: different purposes as well as for (i) As fixed charge instruments, different	 time	periods.	Banks	extend debentures put a permanent loans	to	firms	of	all	sizes	and	in	many burden on the earnings of a ways, like, cash credits, overdrafts, term company.	There	is	a	greater	risk	 loans, purchase/discounting of bills, when earnings of the company and	issue	of	letter	of	credit.	The	rate fluctuate; (ii)	 In	case	of	redeemable	debentures,	 of interest charged by banks depends the company has to make on various factors such as the provisions for repayment on characteristics of the firm and the the	 specified	 date,	 even	 during	 level	of	interest	rates	in	the	economy. periods	of	financial	difficulty; The loan is repaid either in lump sum (iii) Each company has certain or	in	installments. borrowing	 capacity.	 With	 the	 Bank credit is not a permanent issue of debentures, the capacity source	of	funds.	Though	banks	have of a company to further borrow started extending loans for longer funds	reduces. periods, generally such loans are Box C Types of Debentures 1. Secured and Unsecured: Secured	debentures	are	such	which	create	a	charge on	the	assets	of	the	company,	thereby	mortgaging	the	assets	of	the	company. Unsecured	debentures	on	the	other	hand	do	not	carry	any	charge	or	security on	the	assets	of	the	company. 2. Registered and Bearer: Registered	debentures	are	 those	which	are	duly recorded	in	the	register	of	debenture	holders	maintained	by	the	company. These	can	be	transferred	only	through	a	regular	instrument	of	transfer.	In contrast, the debentures which are transferable by mere delivery are called bearer	debentures. 3. Convertible and Non-Convertible: Convertible debentures are those debentures that can be converted into equity shares after the expiry of a specified	period.	On	the	other	hand,	non-convertible	debentures	are	those which	cannot	be	converted	into	equity	shares. 4. First and Second: Debentures	that	are	repaid	before	other	debentures	are repaid	are	known	as	first	debentures.	The	second	debentures	are	those	which are	paid	after	the	first	debentures	have	been	paid	back. 2024-25 Chapter 8.indd   187 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM 188 BUSINESS  STUDIES used	 for	medium	 to	 short	 periods.	 of obtaining funds slightly The borrower is required to provide difficult; some security or create a charge on 	(iii)	 In	some	cases,	difficult	terms	and the	assets	of	the	firm	before	a	loan	is	 conditions	are	imposed	by	banks. sanctioned	by	a	commercial	bank. for	the	grant	of	loan.	For	example, restrictions may be imposed on Merits the sale of mortgaged goods, thus The merits of raising funds from a making normal business working commercial bank are as follows: difficult. (i) Banks provide timely assistance to business by providing funds as 8.4.10  Financial Institutions and	when	needed	by	it.		 The government has established (ii)	 Secrecy	 of	 business	 can	 be	 a number of financial institutions maintained as the information all over the country to provide supplied to the bank by the finance to business organisations borrowers	is	kept	confidential; (see	 Box	 E).	 These	 institutions	 are (iii)	 Formalities	 such	 as	 issue	 of	 established by the central as well as prospectus and underwriting are state	governments.	They	provide	both not required for raising loans owned capital and loan capital for long from	a	 bank.	 This,	 therefore,	 is an	easier	source	of	funds; and medium term requirements and (iv)	 Loan	 from	 a	 bank	 is	 a	 flexible	 supplement	 the	 traditional	 financial source of finance as the loan agencies	 like	 commercial	 banks.	 As amount  can be  increased these institutions aim at promoting the according to business needs and industrial development of a country, can be repaid in advance when these	 are	 also	 called	 ‘development funds	are	not	needed. banks’.	 In	 addition	 to	 providing financial	assistance,	these	institutions Limitations also conduct market surveys and provide technical assistance and The major limitations of commercial managerial services to people who banks	as	a	 source	 of	 finance	are	 as	 run	 the	 enterprises.	 This	 source	 of follows: financing	is	considered	suitable	when (i)	 Funds	are	generally	available	for	 large funds for longer duration are short periods and its extension or required for expansion, reorganisation renewal	is	uncertain	and	difficult; and	modernisation	of	an	enterprise. (ii) Banks make detailed investigation of	the	company’s	affairs,	financial	 Merits structure	etc.,	and	may	also	ask for security of assets and personal The merits of raising funds through sureties.	This	makes	the	procedure	 financial	institutions	are	as	follows: 2024-25 Chapter 8.indd   188 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE 189 BOX D Inter Corporate Deposits (ICD) Inter	Corporate	Deposits	are	unsecured	short-term	deposits	made	by	a	company with	another	company.	ICD	market	is	used	for	short-term	cash	management	of	a large	corporate.	As	per	the	RBI	guidelines,	the	minimum	period	of	ICDs	is	7	days which	can	be	extended	to	one	year. The	three	types	of	Inter	Corporate	Deposits	are: (i)	 Three	months	deposits; (ii)	 Six	months	deposits; (iii)	 Call	deposits. Interest	rate	on	ICDs	may	remain	fixed	or	may	be	floating.	The	rate	of	interest	on these	deposits	is	higher	than	that	of	banks.	These	deposits	are	usually	considered by	the	borrower	company	to	solve	problems	of	short-term	funds	insufficiency. (i)	 Financial	 institutions	 provide	  (i)	 Financial	 institutions	 follow long-term	finance,	which	are	not	 rigid	 criteria	 for	 grant	 of	 loans. provided	by	commercial	banks; Too many formalities make the (ii) Besides providing funds, many procedure time consuming and of these institutions provide f inancia l ,  manager ia l  and expensive; technical advice and consultancy  (ii) Certain restrictions such as to	business	firms; restriction on dividend payment (iii) Obtaining loan from financial are imposed on the powers of institutions increases the goodwill the borrowing company by the of the borrowing company in the financial	institutions; capital	 market.	 Consequently,	  (iii) Financial	 institutions	may	have such a company can raise funds their nominees on the Board easily	from	other	sources	as	well;	 of	 Directors	 of	 the	 borrowing (iv) As repayment of loan can be made in easy instalments, it does not company thereby restricting the prove to be much of a burden on powers	of	the	company. the	business; (v) The funds are made available 8.5 international financing even during periods of depression, In	addition	to	the	sources	discussed when	other	sources	of	finance	are	 above, there are various avenues not	available. for organisations to raise funds internationally.	With	 the	opening	up Limitations of an economy and the operations of The major limitations of raising funds the business organisations becoming from	financial	institutions	are	as	given	 global,	 Indian	 companies	 have	 an below: access to funds in global capital 2024-25 Chapter 8.indd   189 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM 190 BUSINESS  STUDIES market.	Various	international	sources	 of a company are delivered to the from where funds may be generated depository	 bank.	 The	 depository include: bank issues depository receipts (i)  Commercial Banks: Commercial against	 these	 shares. 	 Such banks all over the world extend foreign depository receipts denominated currency	loans	for	business	purposes.	 in	US	dollars	are	known	as	Global They are an important source of Depository	Receipts	(GDR).	GDR	is financing non-trade international a negotiable instrument and can be operations.	 The	 types	 of	 loans	 and	 traded	freely	like	any	other	security. services provided by banks vary from In	the	Indian	context,	a	GDR	is	an country	 to	 country.	 For	 example,	 instrument issued abroad by an Standard	 Chartered	 emerged	 as	 a	 Indian	 company	 to	 raise	 funds major source of foreign currency loans in some foreign currency and is to	the	Indian	industry.	 listed and traded on a foreign stock	exchange.	A	holder	of	GDR (ii) International Agencies and can at any time convert it into the Development Banks: A number number	of	shares	it	represents.	The of  internat ional  agencies and holders	of	GDRs	do	not	carry	any development banks have emerged over voting rights but only dividends the	years	to	finance	international	trade	 and	 capital	 appreciation.	Many and	 business.	 These	 bodies	 provide	 Indian	companies	such	as	Infosys, long and medium term loans and Reliance,	Wipro	 and	 ICICI	 have grants to promote the development of raised money through issue of economically backward areas in the GDRs	(see	Box	F). world.	These	bodies	were	set	up	by	the	  (b) American Depository Receipts Governments	 of	 developed	 countries	 (ADRs): The depository receipts of the world at national, regional and issued	by	a	company	 in	 the	USA international levels for funding various are	known	as	American	Depository projects.	 The	more	 notable	 among	 Receipts.	ADRs	are	bought	and	sold them	 include	 International	 Finance	 in American markets, like regular Corporation	 (IFC),	 EXIM	Bank	 and	 stocks.	 It	 is	 similar	 to	 a	 GDR Asian	Development	Bank. except that it can be issued only to (iii) International Capital Markets: American citizens and can be listed Modern organisations including and traded on a stock exchange multinational companies depend of	USA. upon sizeable borrowings in rupees as (c) Indian Depository Receipt (IDRs): well	as	in	foreign	currency.	Prominent	 An	Indian	Depository	Receipt	is	a financial	 instruments	 used	 for	 this	 financial	instrument	denominated purpose are: in	Indian	Rupees	in	the	form	of	a (a) Global Depository Receipts Depository	 Receipt.	 It	 is	 created (GDR’s): The local currency shares by	an	Indian	Depository	to	enable 2024-25 Chapter 8.indd   190 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE 191 Box E Companies	rush	to	float	GDR	issues It’s	not	the	IPO	(initial	public	offer)	market	alone	which	is	humming	with	activity. Companies — mostly small and medium-sized — are rushing to the overseas market	 to	 raise	 funds	 through	Global	Depository	Receipts	 (GDRs).	 Five	 firms have already raised $464 million (around ` 2,040 crore) from the international markets	 through	GDR	offerings	 this	year.	This	 is	almost	double	of	$228.6	mn raised	by	nine	companies	in	2004	and	$63.09	mn	mobilised	by	four	companies in	2003.	Nearly	20	 companies	 are	waiting	 in	 the	wings	 to	 launch	GDR	 issues worth	over	$1	bn	in	the	coming	months.	On	the	other	hand,	though	the	number