Chapter 5 EmErging modEs of BusinEss LEARNING OBJECTIVES After studying this chapter, you should be able to: •	 state the meaning of e-business; •	 explain the process of online buying and selling as a part of e-business; •	 distinguish e-business from traditional business; •	 state	benefits	of	switching	over	to	electronic	mode; •	 explain	requirements	for	a	firm’s	initiation	into	e-business; •	 identify major security concerns of electronic mode of doing business; •	 discuss the need for business process outsourcing; and •	 appreciate the scope of business process outsourcing. 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   113 9/2/2022   2:12:15 PM 114 BUSINESS  STUDIES “Let	us	do	some	shopping,”	Rita	woke	up	Rekha,	her	friend	from	the	home-village who	had	come	to	Delhi	during	the	vacations.	“At	this	hour	well	past	midnight,” said	Rekha	 rubbing	her	 eyes,	 “Who	would	be	 sitting	with	his	 shop	open	 for you?”	“Oh!	Perhaps	I	could	not	convey	it	properly.	We	are	not	going	anywhere! I	am	talking	about	online	shopping	over	the	internet!”	told	Rita.	“Oh	yes!	I	have heard	of	online	shopping,	but	have	never	done	any,”	Rekha	said,	“What	would they	be	selling	over	the	internet,	how	will	they	deliver,	What	about	payment… and	why	is	it	that	internet	has	not	yet	become	as	popular	in	the	villages?	As Rekha	was	grappling	with	these	questions,	Rita	had	already	logged	on	to	one of	India’s	largest	online	shopping	mall. 5.1 introduction responsible for these	two	new	modes of	business	would	be	in	order. The	 way	 business	 is	 done	 has	 The	newer	modes	of	business	are undergone fundamental changes not	 new	 business.	 These	 are	 rather during the last decade or so. The simply	the	new	ways	of	doing	business manner of conducting business is attributable to a number of factors. referred	to	as	the	‘mode	of	business,’ and,	the	prefix	‘emerging’	underlines	 You	 are	 aware	 that	 business	 as	 an the fact, that these changes are activity	 is	 aimed	 at	 creating	utilities happening	 here	 and	now,	 and,	 that	 or	 value	 in	 the	 form	 of	 goods	 and these trends are likely to continue. services	 which	 the	 household	 and In	 fact,	 if	 one	 were	 to	 list	 the industrial buyers purchase for meeting three strongest trends that are their	needs	and	wants.	In	an	effort	to shaping	 	 business,	 these	would	 be: improve	the	business	processes	—	be	it (i)	 digitisation	—	the	 conversion	 of	 purchase and production, marketing, text,	sound,	images,	video,	and	other	 finance	or	human	resources	business content into a series of ones and zeroes managers and business thinkers that can be transmitted electronically, keep	evolving	newer	and	better	ways (ii) outsourcing, and, (iii) inter- of	doing	things.	Business	firms	have nationalisation and globalisation. You to strengthen their capabilities of will	read	about	international	business	 creating	utilities	and	delivering	value in	Chapter	11.	In	this	chapter,	we	will	 to	 successfully	meet	 the	 competitive be	familiarising	you	with	the	first	two	 pressures	and	ever-growing	demands developments,	i.e.,	digitisation	(a	term	 of	consumers	for	better	quality,	lower from electronics) of business — also prices,	speedier	deliveries	and	better referred to as electronic business customer care.  Besides, the quest for (e-business), and Business Process benefitting	from	emerging	technologies Outsourcing	(BPO).		Before	we	do	so,	 means	 that	 business	 as	 an	 activity a brief discussion about the factors keeps	evolving. 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   114 9/2/2022   2:12:15 PM EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS 115 5.2 e-BusinEss transactions and functions conducted If the term business is taken to mean electronically, including the more a	wide	range	of	activities	comprising	 popular gamut of transactions called industry, trade and commerce; ‘e-commerce.’	 e-commerce	 covers	 a e-business may be defined as the firm’s	interactions	with	its	customers conduct of industry, trade and and	 suppliers	 over	 the	 internet. commerce using the computer e -bus iness  inc ludes  not  only networks.	The	network	you	are	most	 e - c ommerc e ,  bu t  a l s o  o the r familiar	with	as	a	student	or	consumer	 electronically conducted business is the internet. Whereas internet functions such as production, is	 a	 public	 thorough	 way,	 firms	 inventory	 management,	 product use	more	 private,	 and,	 hence	more	 development,	accounting	and	finance secure	networks	for	more	effective	and	 and human resource  management. efficient	management	of	their	internal	 e-business is, therefore, clearly much functions.  more	than	buying	and	selling	over	the e-business versus e-commerce: Internet, i.e., e-commerce. Though, many a times, the terms e-business and e-commerce are used 5.2.1 Scope of e-Business interchangeably, yet more precise definitions	would	distinguish	between	 We	 have	mentioned	 above	 that	 the the	 two.	Just	as	 the	 term	 ‘business’	 scope	 of	 e-business	 is	 quite	 vast. is	 a	 broader	 term	 than	 ‘commerce’, Almost all types of business functions e-business is a more elaborate term such	as	production,	finance,	marketing and	 comprises	 various	 business	 and	personnel	administration	as	well Figure 5.1 Business to Business e-Commerce 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   115 9/2/2022   2:12:15 PM 116 BUSINESS  STUDIES as	managerial	activities	like	planning,	 A	 network	 of	 computers	 is	 used	 for organising and controlling can be placing orders, monitoring production carried	out	over	computer	networks.	 and	 delivery	 of	 components,	 and The	other	way	of	looking	at	the	scope	 making	payments.	Likewise,	a	firm	may of e-business is to examine it in strengthen	and	improve	its	distribution terms	of	people	or	parties	involved	in	 system by exercising a real time (as it electronic	 transactions.	 Viewed	 from	 happens)	 control	 over	 its	 stock-inthis	 perspective,	 a	 firm’s	 electronic	 transit	as	well	as	 that	with	different transactions	 and	 networks	 can	 be	 middlemen in different locations. visualised	 as	 extending	 into	 three	 For example, each consignment of directions	viz.,	(i)	B2B	which	is	a	firm’s	 goods	 from	 a	 warehouse	 and	 the interactions	with	 other	 businesses, stock-at-hand can be monitored and (ii)	B2C	i.e.,	a	firm’s	interactions	with	 replenishments and reinforcements its customers and (iii) intra-B or a can be set  in  mot ion as and firm’s	internal	processes. when	needed.	Or	 else,	 a	 customer’s A	 brief	 discussion	 of	 various	 specifications	may	be	routed	through constituents of e-business and inter- the dealers to the factory and fed and intra-transactions among them is into the manufacturing system given	as	below: for customised production. Use of (i) B2B Commerce: Here, both e-commerce	expedites	the	movement	of the	 parties	 involved	 in	 e-commerce	 the information and documents; and of transactions	are	business	firms,	and,	 late,	money	transfers	as	well. hence	 the	name	B2B,	 i.e.,	 business- Historically, the term e-commerce to-business (see Figure 5.1). Creation originally	meant	 facilitation	 of	 B2B of	 uti l i t ies	 or	 del ivering	 value	 transactions	 using	 Electronic	 Data requires	 a	 business	 to	 interact	with	 Interchange	(EDI)	technology	to	send a number of other business firms and	 receive	 commercial	 documents which	may	 be	 suppliers	 or	 vendors	 like	purchase	orders	or	invoices. of	diverse	inputs;	or	else	they	may	be a	part	of	the	channel	through	which (ii)  B2C Commerce: As the name a firm distributes its products to implies,	B2C	(business-to-customers) the consumers. For example, the transactions	 have	 business	 firms	 at manufacture of an automobile one end and its customers on the requires assembly of a large number other	 end.	Although,	what	 comes	 to of	components	which	in	turn	are	being	 one’s	mind	instantaneously	is	online manufactured	elsewhere	—	within	 the	 shopping, it must be appreciated vicinity	 of	 the	 automobile	 factory	 or	 that	 ‘selling’	 is	 the	 outcome	 of	 the even	overseas.	To	reduce	dependence	 marketing process. And, marketing on a single supplier, the automobile begins	well	before	a	product	is	offered factory	has	to	cultivate	more	than	one	 for	sale	and	continues	even	after	the vendor	 for	 each	 of	 the	 components.	 product has been	sold.	B2C commerce, 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   116 9/2/2022   2:12:15 PM EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS 117 Benefits of e-Commerce 1. Business Organisation: (i) Expands the marketplace to national and international markets, (ii)  Gradual decline in the cost of operations, (iii)	 	Facilitates	‘pull’	supply	chain	management, (iv)	 Competitive	advantage	over	competitors, (v)	 	Proper	time	management	and	support	business	processes,	and (vi)	 Small	firms	co-exist	with	big	firms	(win-win). 2.	 Benefits	to	Consumers	and	Society (i) Flexibility, (ii)	 Competitive	price/discounts/waive	offs, (iii) More options and choices and Customised products, (iv)	 Quick	and	Timely	delivery	(digitised	products), (v)	 Employment	potential, (vi)	 Facilitate	e-Auctions	and	e-Tenders, (vii)	 Interaction	with	consumers, (viii)	 Wider	outreach. therefore, entails	 a	 wide	 gamut	 of	 product features to be tailor-made to marketing activities	such	as	identifying	 suit their requirements, but also the activities,	 promotion	 and	 sometimes	 convenience	of	delivery	and	payment even	delivery	of	products	(e.g.,	music	 at their pleasure. With the onset of or	films)	 that	are	carried	out	online.	 e-commerce, all this has become a e-Commerce permits conduct of these reality. activities	at	a	much	lower	cost	but	high	 Further,	B2C	variant	of	e-commerce speed. For example, ATM speeds up enables	a	business	to	be	in	touch	with withdrawal	of	money. its customers on round-the-clock Customers  these  days  are basis. Companies can conduct online becoming	 very	 choosy	 and	 desire	 surveys	 to	 ascertain	 as	 to	 who	 is individual	 attention	 to	 be	 given	 to	 buying	what	and	what	the	customer them. Not only do they require the satisfaction	level	is. ATM speeds up Withdrawal of Money e-Commerce	greatly	facilitates	and	speeds	up	the	entire	B2C	process.		Withdrawal of	one’s	own	money	from	banks	was,	for	example,	a	tedious	process	in	the	past. One	had	to	go	through	a	series	of	procedural	formalities	before	he	or	she	was	able to get the payment. After the introduction of ATMs, all that is fast becoming  a history	now.	The	first	thing	that	occurs	is	that	the	customer	is	able	to	withdraw his money, and the rest of the back-end processes take place later. 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   117 9/2/2022   2:12:15 PM 118 BUSINESS  STUDIES By	now,	you	might	have	formed	the	 p r o d u c t s  m a d e  a s  p e r  t h e opinion	that	B2C	is	a	one-way	traffic,	 requirements	 of	 the	 individual i.e., from business-to-customers. customer.	 In	 a	 similar	 vein,	 closer But do remember that its corollary, computer-based interactions among C2B	commerce	is	very	much	a	reality	 the other departments makes it which	 provides	 the	 consumers	with	 possib le  for  the f i rm to  reap the	 freedom	 of	 shopping-at-will.	 advantages	 of	 efficient	 inventory Customers can also make use of call and cash management, greater centres set up by companies to make utilisation of plant and machinery, toll free calls to make queries and lodge effective	 handling	 of	 customers’ complaints round the clock at no extra orders,	and	effective	human	resource cost to them. The beauty of the process management. is that one need not set up these call Just	as	 intercom	facilitated	voice centres or help lines; they may be communication	 within	 the	 office, outsourced. We shall discuss this intranet facilitates multimedia and aspect	later	in	the	section	devoted	to	 even	 3-D	 graphic	 communication Business Process Outsourcing (BPO). among		organisational	units	for	well(iii) Intra-B Commerce: Here, parties informed decisions, permitting better involved	in	the	electronic	transactions	 coordination, faster decisions and are	from	within	a	given	business	firm,	 speedier	workflows.	Take	for	example, hence, the name intra-B commerce. As a	firm’s	interactions	with	its	employees, noted earlier too, one critical difference sometimes	 referred	 to	 as	 B2E between	e-commerce	and	e-business	 commerce.  Companies are resorting is that, e-commerce comprises a to	personnel	recruitment,	interviewing business	 firm’s	 interaction	with	 its	 and	 selection,	 training,	 development suppliers,	 and	 distributors/other	 and	 education	 via	 e-commerce business	firms	(hence,	the	name	B2B)	 (captured in a catch-all phrase and	customers	(B2C)	over	the	internet.	 ‘e-learning’).	 Employees	 can	 use While	 e-business	 is	 a	much	 wider	 electronic catalogues and ordering forms	and	access	inventory	information term and also includes the use of for	 better	 interaction	 with	 the intranet for managing interactions and customers.	They	can	send	field	reports dealings	among	various	departments	 via	 e-mail	 and	 the	management	 can and	persons	within	a	firm.	It	is	largely	 have	 them	 on	 real	 time	 basis.	 In due to use of intra-B commerce that fact,	 Virtual	 Private	 Network	 (VPN) today it has become possible for technology	would	mean	that	employees the f irms to go in for f lexible do	not	have	to	come	to	office.	Instead, manufacturing. Use of computer in	a	way	the	office	goes	to	them	and networks	makes	 it	 possible	 for	 the	 they	 can	 work	 from	wherever	 they marketing department to interact are,	and	at	their	own	speed	and	time constantly	 with	 the	 production	 convenience.	Meetings	 can	 be	 held department and get the customised online	via	tele/	video	conferencing. 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   118 9/2/2022   2:12:15 PM EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS 119 (iv) C2C Commerce: Here, the to	Pay	Pal.	From	there,	PayPal	notifies business originates from the consumer the	seller	that	they	will	hold	the	money and the ultimate destination is also for	 them	until	 the	 goods	 have	 been consumers,	 thus	 the	 name	 C2C	 shipped and accepted by the buyer. commerce	 (see	 Figure	 5.2).	 This	 An	 important 	 C2C	 area	 o f type of commerce is best suited for interactive	 commerce	 can	 be	 the dealing	 in	 goods	 for	 which	 there	 is	 formation	 of	 consumers’	 forum	 and no established market mechanism, pressure	 groups.	 You	might	 have for example, selling used books or heard	of	Yahoo	groups.	Like	a	vehicle clothes either on cash or barter basis. owner	in	a	traffic	jam	can	alert	others The	vast	space	of	the	internet	allows	 via	message	on	radio	(you	must	have persons to globally search for potential heard	traffic	alerts	on	FM)	about	the buyers. Additionally, e-commerce traffic	situation	of	the	area	he	is	stuck technology	 provides	market	 system	 in;	an	aggrieved	customer	can	share security	 to	 such	 transactions	which	 his	experience	with	a	product/service/ otherwise	would	have	been	missing	if vendor	and	warn	others	by	writing	just the	 buyers	 and	 sellers	 were	 to a	message	and	making	it	known	to	the interact  in anonymity of one-to-one entire group. And, it is quite possible transactions? An excellent example of that the group pressure might result this	is	found	at	eBay	where	consumers	 in a solution of this problem. sell	their	goods	and	services	to	other	 From the foregoing discussion consumers.	 To	 make	 this	 activity concerning scope of e-business, it is more	 secure	 and	 robust,	 several	 clear that e-business applications are technologies	 have	 emerged.	 Firstly,	 varied	and	many. eBay	allows	all	the	sellers	and	buyers to rate one another. In this manner, e-Business versus Traditional future	prospective	purchasers	may	see	 Business that a particular seller has sold to more than	2,000	 customers	—	all	 of	whom	 By	 now,	 you	 must	 have	 formed rate the seller as excellent. In another an	 idea	 as	 to	 how	 e-enabling	 has example,	a	prospective	purchaser	may	 radically transformed the mode of see	a	 seller	who	has	previously	 sold	 doing	business.	Table	5.1	(page	124) only four times and all four rate the provides	 a	 feature	 on	 comparison seller poorly. This type of information between	 traditional	 business	 and is helpful. Another technology that e-business. has	emerged	to	support	C2C	activities	 A	comparative	assessment	of	 the is that of the payment intermediary. features of traditional and e-business PayPal is a good example of this kind. as	listed	in	Table	5.1	points	towards Instead of purchasing items directly the	distinct	benefits	and	limitations	of from	an	unknown,	untrusted	 seller;	 e-business	that	we	shall	discuss	in	the the buyer can instead send the money following	paragraphs. 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   119 9/2/2022   2:12:15 PM 120 BUSINESS  STUDIES e-commerce makes flexible Manufacturing and Mass Customisation possible Customised	products	have	 traditionally	 been	made	 to	 order	 by	 craftsmen	 and have,	 therefore,	 been	 expensive	 and	 delivery	 times	have	 been	 long.	 Industrial revolution	meant	that	organisations	could	engage	in	mass	production	and	could sell	homogeneous	products	 rolled	out	of	 the	 factory	at	a	 lower	cost	due	 to	 the economies	of	scale.	Thanks	to	e-commerce,	now	organisations	can	offer	customised products/	services	at	lower	costs,	that	previously	were	only	associated	with	mass produced	commodity	items.	Here	are	a	few	examples: 401(k)	Forum	(US)	 	Customises	educational	content	and	investment	advice	based on	individual	interviews. Acumin	Corp.	(US)	 	Customises	 vitamin	 pills	 specified	 by	 using	 the	 Internet. Customers	fill	in	lifestyle	and	health	questionnaire. Dell	(US)		 Build	your	own	PC. Green Mountain Electricity supplier (but not generator). Customers could select Energy Resources sources for their electricity, e.g., hydro, solar, etc. (US) Levi	Jeans	 Tailored	jeans	service.	Web	service	suspended	after	complaints (Original	Spin)	 by	retailers	but	service	now	offered	through	retailers.	Offers (US)	 49,500	different	sizes	and	30	styles	for	a	total	of	nearly	1.5 million options for a cost of just $55. Orders are sent by net and	jeans	are	produced	and	shipped	in	2-3	weeks. N.V.	Nutsbedrijf	 Westland	supplies	natural	gas	to	many	tulip	growers	in	the Westland Netherlands. Computers in the greenhouse help greenhouse (Newzealand)		 owners	maintain	temperature,	CO2	output,	humidity,	light	and other	factors	in	the	most	cost-efficient	manner. National	Bicycle	 Custom	built	bicycles	within	2/3	days	of	taking	the	order. (Japan) Simon	and	 Teachers	can	order	customised	books	specifically	matched	to Schuster	(US)	 individual	course	and	student	needs.	Xerox	DocuTech	printers are	generating	in	excess	of	125,000	customised	books	a	month. Skyway	(US)		 Skyway	is	a	logistics	company	offering	whole	order	delivery. Shipments	 from	multiple	 origins	with	 different	modes	 of transport	can	be	merged	in	transit	and	delivered	as	a	single order	with	one	set	of	paperwork	to	the	store	or	consumer. SmithKline	 Creates	customised	stop	smoking	programme	for	customers. Beecham	(US)	 Uses	 call	 centre	 questionnaire	 to	 generate	 a	 series	 of personalised communications. Source: Adapted from http://www.managingchange.com 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   120 9/2/2022   2:12:15 PM EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS 121 Place advertisement Website Want to sell products Want to buy products Receives products Customer Receives money Customer Figure 5.2  Consumer to Consumer e-Commerce (C2C) 5.3 BEnEfits of E-BusinEss located closest to his location. The food (i) Ease of formation and lower is	delivered	and	the	payment	collected investment requirements: Unlike a by the restaurant staff and the amount host of procedural requirements for due to you as a client solicitor is setting up an industry, e-business is credited to your account through an relatively	easy	to	start.	The	benefits	of	 electronic clearing system. internet technology accrue to big or (ii) Convenience: Internet offers the small business alike. In fact, Internet convenience	 of	 ‘24	 hours	 × 7 days is responsible for the popularity of a	week	×	 365	days’	 a	 year	 business the phrase: ‘networked individuals that	allowed	Rita	and	Rekha	to	go	for and firms are more efficient than shopping	well	 after	midnight.	 Such networthed individuals.’ This means flexibility	 is	 available	 even	 to	 the that	 even	 if	 you	 do	 not	 have	much	 organisational	personnel	whereby	they of	 the	 investment	 (networth)	 but	 can	do	work	from	wherever	they	are, have	contacts	 (network),	 you	can	do	 and	whenever	they	may	want	to	do	it. fabulous business. Yes, e-business is truly a business as Imagine a restaurant that does not enabled and enhanced by electronics have	 any	 requirement	 of	 a	 physical	 and	offers	the	advantage	of	accessing space.	 Yes,	 you	may	have	 an	 online	 anything,	anywhere,	anytime. ‘menu’	representing	the	best	of	cuisines	 (iii) Speed: As already noted, much of from	the	best	of	restaurants	the	world- the	buying	or	selling	involves	exchange over	 that	 you	have	 networked	with.	 of	 information	 that	 Internet	 allows The	 customer	 visits	 your	 website,	 at	 the	click	of	a	mouse.	This	benefit decides the menu, places the order becomes	all	the	more	attractive	in	the that in turn is routed to the restaurant case	of	information-intensive	products 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   121 9/2/2022   2:12:15 PM 122 BUSINESS  STUDIES Box A Some e-Business Applications e-Procurement:	 It	 involves	internet-based	sales	transactions	between	business firms,	including	both,	“reverse	auctions”	that	facilitate	online	trade	between	a	single business purchaser and many sellers, and, digital marketplaces that facilitate online	trading	between	multiple	buyers	and	sellers. e-Bidding/e-Auction:	Most	 shopping	 sites	 have	 ‘Quote	 your	 price’	 whereby you	can	bid	for	the	goods	and	services	(such	as	airline	tickets!).	It	also	includes e-tendering	whereby	one	may	submit	tender	quotations	online. e-Communication/e-Promotion: Right from e-mail, it includes publication of online	 catalogues	 displaying	 images	 of	 goods,	 advertisement	 through	banners, pop-ups,	opinion	poles	and	customer	surveys,	etc.	Meetings	and	conferences	may be	held	by	the	means	of	video	conferencing. e-Delivery:	 It	 includes	 electronic	 delivery	 of	 computer	 software,	 photographs, videos,	books	(e-books)	and	journals	(e-journals)	and	other	multimedia	content	to the	user’s	computer.	It	also	includes	rendering	of	legal,	accounting,	medical,	and other	consulting	services	electronically.	In	fact,	internet	provides	the	firms	with	the opportunities	for	outsourcing	of	a	host	of	Information	Technology	Enabled	Services (ITES)	that	we	will	be	discussing	under	business	process	outsourcing.		Now,	you can	even	print	the	airlines	and	railway	tickets	at	home! e-Trading:	It	involves	securities	trading,	that	is	online	buying	and	selling	of	shares and	other	financial	instruments.	For	example,	sharekhan.com	is	India’s	largest online	trading	firm. such	 as	 softwares,	movies,	music, the global market; on the other hand, e-books	and	journals	that	can	even	be	 it affords to the buyer a freedom to delivered	online.	Cycle	 time,	 i.e.,	 the	 choose products from almost any time taken to complete a cycle from part	of	the	world.	It	would	not	be	an the	origin	of	demand	to	its	fulfilment, exaggeration to say that in the absence is substantially reduced due to of	 internet,	globalisation	would	have transformation of the business been considerably restricted in scope processes from being sequential to and speed. becoming parallel or simultaneous. (v) Movement towards a paperless You	know	that	in	the	digital	era,	money	 society: Use of Internet has considerably is defined as electronic pulses at reduced	 dependence	 on	 paperwork the speed of light, thanks to the and	the	attendant	‘red	tape.’	You	know electronic funds transfer technology that Maruti Udyog does bulk of its of e-commerce.      sourcing of supplies of materials and (iv) Global reach/access: Internet is components in a paper less fashion. truly	without	boundaries.	On	the	one	 Even	the	government	departments	and hand,	it	allows	the	seller	an	access	to	 regulatory authorities are increasingly 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   122 9/2/2022   2:12:15 PM EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS 123 moving	in	this	direction	whereby	they	 And, this requirement is responsible allow	electronic	filing	of	 returns	and	 for	what	is	known	as	digital	divide,	that reports. In fact, e-commerce tools are is	the	division	of	society	on	the	basis effecting	 the	 administrative	 reforms	 of	familiarity	and	non-familiarity	with aimed at speeding up the process of digital technology. granting	permissions,	approvals	and	 (iv) Increased risk due to anonymity licences.	In	this	respect,	the	provisions	 and non-traceability of parties: of	 Information	 Technology	 Act	 2000	 Internet	 transactions	 occur	 between are	quite	noteworthy. cyber personalities. As such, it becomes difficult	to	establish	the	identity	of	the 5.4 L parties.	Moreover,	one	does	not	know imitations of E-BusinEss even	 the	 location	 from	 where	 the e-business	is	not	all	that	rosy.	Doing	 parties may be operating. It is riskier, business in the electronic mode suffers therefore, transacting through internet. from	certain	limitations.	It	is	advisable	 e-business is riskier also in the sense to	be	aware	of	these	limitations	as	well.	 that there are additional hazards of (i) Low personal touch: High-tech it impersonation (someone else may may	 be,	 e-business,	 however,	 lacks	 transact in your name) and leakage warmth	of	interpersonal	interactions.	 of	 confidential	 information	 such	 as To	 this	 extent,	 it	 is	 relatively	 less	 credit card details.  Then, there also suitable mode of business in respect are	problems	of	‘virus,’	and	‘hacking,’ of product categories requiring high that	you	must	have	heard	of.	If	not,	we personal touch such as garments, will	be	dealing	with	security	and	safety toiletries, etc. concerns of online business. (ii) Incongruence between order (v) People resistance: The process taking/giving and order fulfilment of	adjustment	to	new	technology	and new	way	of	doing	things	causes	stress speed:	 Information	 can	 flow	 at	 the	 and a sense of insecurity. As a result, click of a mouse, but the physical people	may	 resist	 an	 organisation’s delivery	 of	 the	 product	 takes	 time.	 plans of entry into e-business. This incongruence may play on the (vi) Ethical fallouts:	 “So,	 you	 are patience of the customers. At times, planning	 to	 quit,	 you	may	 as	 well due	 to	 technical	 reasons,	web	 sites	 quit	right	now”,	said	the	HR	manager take unusually long time to open. This showing	her	a	copy	of	the	e-mail	that may further frustrate the user.  she	had	written	to	her	friend.	Sabeena (iii) Need for technology capability was	both	shocked	and	stunned	as	to and competence of parties to how	her	boss	got	through	to	her	e-mail e-business: Apart from the traditional account.	 Nowadays,	 companies	 use 3R ’s 	 (Read ing ,  WR i t ing ,  and an	‘electronic	eye’	to	keep	track	of	the ARithmetic), e-business requires a computer	 files	 you	use,	 your	 e-mail fairly high degree of familiarity of the account,	 the	websites	 you	 visit	 etc. parties	with	the	world	of	computers.	 Is it ethical? 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   123 9/2/2022   2:12:15 PM 124 BUSINESS  STUDIES Table 5.1    Difference between Traditional and e-Business Basis of distinction Traditional business e-business Ease of formation Difficult Simple Physical presence Required Not required Proximity	to	the	source	of	raw Locational requirements materials or the market for None the products Cost of setting up High Low	as	no	requirement of physical facilities High	due	to	fixed	charges	 Low	as	a	result	of associated	with	investment	 reliance	on	network	of Operating cost in procurement and storage, relationships rather production, marketing and than	ownership	of distribution facilities resources Nature	of	contact	with the suppliers and the Indirect through customers intermediaries Direct Hierarchical	-	from	top	level	 Non-hierarchical, Nature of internal management	to	middle	level	 allowing	direct	vertical, communication management	to	lower	level	 horizontal and diagonal management	to	operatives communication Response time for meeting customers’/internal	 Long Instantaneous requirements Shape	of	the	 Vertical/tall,	due	to	hierarchy	 Horizontal/flat	due	to organisational structure or chain of command directness of command and communication. Sequential	precedence- succession relationship, Simultaneous Business processes and i.e.,	purchase	-	production/ (concurrence) different length of the cycle operation - marketing - sales. processes. Business The, business process cycle process cycle is, is, therefore, longer therefore, shorter Opportunity for inter- personal touch Much more Less Less.	However,	for digitable products Opportunity for physical such an opportunity pre-sampling of the Much more is tremendous. You products can pre-sample music, books, journals, software,	videos,	etc. 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   124 9/2/2022   2:12:15 PM EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS 125 Ease of going global Less Much, as cyber space is truly	without	boundaries Much, as IT sector is Government	patronage Shrinking among the topmost priorities of the government Nature of human capital Semi-skilled	and	even	 Technically and unskilled	manpower	needed. professionally	qualified personnel needed Low	due	to	arm’s	length	 High due to the Transaction risk transactions and face-to-face distance and anonymity contact. of the parties Despite limitations, e-commerce is 5.5 onLinE transactions the way Operationally,	one	may	visualise	three It may be pointed out that most of the stages	involved	in	online	transactions. limitations of e-business discussed Firstly,	 the	 pre-purchase/sale	 stage above	 are	 in	 the	 process	 of	 being	 including	advertising	and	informationovercome.	Websites	are	becoming	more	 seeking;	 secondly,	 the	 purchase/ and	more	interactive	to	overcome	the	 sale stage comprised of steps such as problem	of	‘low	touch.’	Communication	 price	negotiation,	closing	of	purchase/ technology	 is	 continually	 evolving	 sales deal and payment; and thirdly, to increase the speed and quality of the	 delivery	 stage	 (see	 Figure	 5.2). communication through internet. It	may	 be	 observed	 from	Figure	 5.2 Efforts	are	on	to	overcome	the	digital	 that, except the stage relating to divide,	 for	 example,	 by	 resorting	 delivery,	all	other	stages	involve	flow to such strategies as setting up of of information. The information is community	 telecentres	 in	 villages	 exchanged in the traditional business and	 rural	 areas	 in	 India	 with	 the	 mode	too,	but	at	severe	time	and	cost involvement	of	government	agencies,	 constraints. In face-to-face interaction NGOs and international institutions. in traditional business mode, for In order to diffuse e-commerce in example,	one	needs	to	travel	to	be	able all nooks and corners, India has to talk to the other party, requiring undertaken	about	150	such	projects.	 travel	 effort,	 greater	 time	 and	 costs. In	 view	 of	 the	 above	 discussion,	 Exchange of information through it is clear that e-business is here to the telephone is also cumbersome. stay and is poised to reshape the It requires simultaneous presence of businesses,	 governance	 and	 the	 both	 the	parties	 for	 verbal	 exchange economies. It is, therefore, appropriate of information. Information can be that	we	familiarise	ourselves	with	how transmitted by post too, but this e-business is conducted. again is quite a time consuming and 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   125 9/2/2022   2:12:16 PM 126 BUSINESS  STUDIES Information Technology Act 2000 paves way for Paperless Society Below	are	given	some	of	the	provisions	of	Information	Technology	Act	2000	that have	made	it	possible	to	have	paper	less	dealings	in	the	business	world	as	well	as in	the	government	domain. Legal recognition of electronic records (Section 4):	Where	any	law	provides	that information	or	any	other	matter	shall	be	in	writing	or	in	the	typewritten	or	printed form,	then,	notwithstanding	anything	contained	in	such	law,	such	requirement shall	be	deemed	to	have	been	satisfied	if	such	information	or	matter	is	rendered or	made	available	in	an	electronic	form;	and	accessible	so	as	to	be	usable	for	a subsequent reference. Legal recognition of digital signatures (Section 5):	Where	any	law	provides	that information	or	any	other	matter	shall	be	authenticated	by	affixing	the	signature or any document shall be signed or bear the signature of any person, hence notwithstanding	 anything	 contained	 in	 such	 law,	 such	 requirement	 shall	 be deemed	to	have	been	satisfied,	if	such	information	or	matter	is	authenticated	by means	of	digital	signature	affixed	in	such	a	manner	as	may	be	prescribed	by	the Central	Government. Use of electronic records and digital signatures in Government and its agencies (Section 6-1):	Where	any	law	provides	for	the	filing	of	any	form,	application	or	any other	document	with	any	office,	authority,	body	or	agency	owned	or	controlled	by	the appropriate	Government	in	a	particular	manner;	the	issue	or	grant	of	any	licence, permit,	sanction	or	approval	by	whatever	name	called	in	a	particular	manner;	the receipt	or	payment	of	money	in	a	particular	manner,	then,	notwithstanding	anything contained	in	any	other	law	for	the	time	being	in	force,	such	requirement	shall	be deemed	to	have	been	satisfied	if	such	filing,	issue,	grant,	receipt	or	payment,	as the case may be, is effected by means of such electronic form as may be prescribed by	the	appropriate	Government. Retention of electronic records (Section 7-1): Where	 any	 law	provides	 that documents,	records	or	information	shall	be	retained	for	any	specific	period,	then, that	requirement	shall	be	deemed	to	have	been	satisfied	if	such	documents,	records or information are retained in the electronic form. Source: Information Technology Act, 2000 expensive	process.	Internet	comes	in	as	 customer’s	 standpoint.	We	 will	 be the	fourth	channel	which	is	free	from	 discussing	the	seller’s	perspective	in	the most	of	the	problems	referred	to	above.	 paragraphs on resource requirements In	 the	 case	 of	 information-intensive	 for	e-business.	So,	are	you	ready	with products	and	services	such	as	software	 the	 shopping	 list	 or	would	 you	 like and	music,	 even	 delivery	 can	 take to rely on your instincts as you take place online. a tour of the shopping mall? Let What is described here is the us	 follow	Rita	 and	Rekha	 browsing process of online trading from a indiatimes.com. 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   126 9/2/2022   2:12:16 PM EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS 127 (i ) Registration:  Before online of	funds	over	the	Internet	using shopping,	 one	 has	 to	 register	 with	 Immediate	 Payment	 Services the	 online	 vendor	 by	 filling-up	 a	 (IMPS),	 NEFT	 and	 RTGS.	 In registration form. Registration means this case, therefore, the buyer that	 you	 have	 an	 ‘account’	 with	 may transfer the amount for the the	 online	 vendor.	 	 Among	 various	 agreed price of the transaction details	 that	 need	 to	 be	 filled	 in	 is	 a	 to the account of the online ‘password’	as	the	sections	relating	to	 vendor	who	may,	then,	proceed	to your	 ‘account’,	 and	 ‘shopping	 cart’	 arrange	for	the	delivery	of	goods. are	 password	 protected.	Otherwise,	 	 •	 Credit or Debit Cards: Popularly anyone can login using your name and referred	to	as	‘plastic	money,’	these shop in your name. This can put you cards	 are	 the	most	widely	used in trouble. medium for online transactions. (ii) Placing an order: You can pick In fact, about 95 per cent of and drop the items in the shopping online consumer transactions cart.	Shopping	cart	is	an	online	record	 are	executed	with	a	credit	card. of	 what	 you	 have	 picked	 up	 while	 Credit	 card	 allows	 its	 holder	 to browsing	the	online	store.	Just	as	in	a	 make purchase on credit. The physical store you can put in and take amount due from the card holder items	out	of	your	cart,	 likewise,	you	 to the online seller is assumed by can	do	so	even	while	shopping	online.	 the	card	issuing	bank,	who	later After	being	sure	of	what	you	want	to	 transfers	the	amount	involved	in buy,	 you	 can	 ‘checkout’	 and	 choose	 the transaction to the credit of the your payment options.  seller.	Buyer’s	account	is	debited, (iii) Payment mechanism: Payment who	often	enjoys	the	freedom	to for the purchases through online deposit the amount in instalments shopping may be done in a number and	 at	 his	 convenience.	 	 Debit of	ways: card	 allows	 its	 holder	 to	make •	 Cash-on Delivery (CoD): As is purchases through it to the clear from the name, payment extent of the amount lying in for the goods ordered online may the corresponding account. The be made in cash at the time of moment any transaction is made, physical	delivery	of	goods. the amount due as payment •	 Cheque:	Alternatively,	the	online	 is deducted electronically from vendor	may	arrange	for	the	pickup	 the card. of	the	cheque	from	the	customer’s	    To accept credit card as an end.	Upon	realisation,	the	delivery	 online	payment	type,	the	seller	first of goods may be made. needs a secure means of collecting •	 Net-banking Transfer: Modern credit card information from its banks	provide	to	their	customers	 customer. Payments through the facility of electronic transfer credit cards can be processed 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   127 9/2/2022   2:12:16 PM 128 BUSINESS  STUDIES either manually, or through an 5.6 sEcurity and safEty of online authorisation system, such e-transactions: e-BusinEss risks as	 SSL	Certificate	 (see	 box	 on, History of e-commerce). Online	 transactions,	 unlike	 arm’s •	Digital Cash: This is a form of length transactions in physical electronic currency that exists exchange, are prone to a number of only in cyberspace. This type of risks. Risk refers to the probability of currency has no real physical any mishappening that can result properties, but offers the ability to into f inancial,  reputational or psychological losses to the parties use real currency in an electronic involved	 in	 a	 transaction.	 Because format. First you need to pay to of greater probability of such risks a	bank	 (vide	cheque,	draft,	etc.)	 in the case of online transactions, an	 amount	 equivalent	 to	 the	 security and safety issues becomes digital	cash	that	you	want	to	get	 the  mos t  c ruc ia l  concern  in issued	 in	your	 favour.	Then	the	 e-business. One may broadly discuss bank	dealing	in	e-cash	will	send	 these issues under three headings: you	a	 special	 software	 (you	 can	 transaction risks, data storage download	on	your	hard	disk)	that	 and t ransmiss ion  r i sks ,  and will	allow	you	to	draw	digital	cash	 threat to intellectual property and from	your	account	with	the	bank.	 privacy	risks. You may then use the digital ( i )  Transaction risks:  Online funds	 to	make	 purchases	 over	 transactions	 are	 vulnerable	 to	 the the	web.		 following	types	of	transaction	risks: 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   128 9/2/2022   2:12:16 PM EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS 129 •	 Seller	denies	that	the	customer	ever	 locations	 and	 service	 records.	 Sites placed the order or the customer such	as	eBay	even	provide	for	rating denies	 that	 he	 ever	 placed	 the	 of	 the	 sellers.	 These	 sites	 provide order. This may be referred to as protection to the customers against ‘default on order taking/giving.’ default	on	delivery	and	reimburse	the •	 The	 intended	 delivery	 does	 not	 payments made up to some extent. take	 place,	 goods	 are	 delivered	 As	 for	 the	 payments,	 we	 have at	wrong	address,	or	goods	other	 already seen that in almost 95 per cent than	 ordered	may	 be	 delivered.	 of the cases people use credit cards This may be regarded as ‘default for their online purchases. At the time on delivery’.		 of	confirming	the	order,	the	buyer	is •	 Seller	does	not	get	the	payment	for	 required to furnish the details such the	 goods	 supplied	whereas	 the	 as the card number, card issuer and customer claims that the payment card	validity	online.	These	details	may was	made.	This	may	be	referred	 be	 processed	 offline;	 and	 only	 after to as ‘default on payment’. satisfying himself or herself about Thus, in e-business  risk may arise the	 availability	 of	 the	 credit	 limits, for the seller or the buyer on account etc.,	 the	 seller	may	 go	 ahead	 with of	 default	 on	 order	 taking/giving,	 the	 delivery	 of	 goods.	 Alternatively, delivery	 as	 well	 as	 payment.	 Such	 e-commerce technology today permits situations	can	be	averted	by	providing	 even	 online	 processing	 of	 the	 credit for	 identity	 and	 location/address	 card information.  For protecting verification	at	the	time	of	registration,	 the credit card details from being and obtaining authorisation as to misused, shopping malls these days the	order	confirmation	and	payment	 use the encryption technology such realisation. For example, in order to as	Netscape’s	 Secure	 Sockets	 Layer confirm	that	the	customer	has	correctly	 (SSL).	You	can	gain	some	information entered his details in the registration about	 SSL	 from	 box	 on	 history	 of form,	 the	seller	may	verify	 the	same	 e-commerce. In the succeeding from	 the	 ‘cookies’.	 Cookies	 are	 very	 section,	we	will	 familiarise	 you	with similar to the caller id in telephones the encryption or cryptography — an that	provide	telemarketers	with	such	 important tool used for safeguarding relevant	information	as:	the	consumer’s	 against data transmission risks in name,	address	and	previous	purchase	 online transactions. payment	 record.	 As	 for	 customer’s	 (ii) Data storage and transmission protection from anonymous sellers, risks:	 Information	 is	 power	 indeed. it	 is	 always	 advisable	 to	 shop	 from	 But	think	for	a	moment	if	the	power well-established	shopping	sites.	While	 goes	into	the	wrong	hands.	Data	stored allowing	 advertisers	 to	 sell	 their	 in the systems and en-route is exposed products online, these sites assure to a number of risks. Vital information customers	 of	 the	 sellers’	 identities,	 may	be	stolen	or	modified	to	pursue 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   129 9/2/2022   2:12:16 PM 130 BUSINESS  STUDIES some	 selfish	motives	 or	 simply	 for	 (iii) Risks of threat to intellectual fun/adventure.	You	must	have	heard	 property and privacy: Internet is an of	‘virus’	and	‘hacking’.	Do	you	know	 open space. Once the information is the	full	form	of	the	acronym	‘VIRUS?’	 available	 over	 the	 internet,	 it	moves It means Vital Information Under out	 of	 the	 private	 domain.	 It	 then Siege.	Actually,	virus	is	a	program	(a	 becomes	 difficult	 to	 protect	 it	 from series	of	commands)	which	replicates	 being	 copied.	Data	 furnished	 in	 the itself on the other computer systems. course of online transactions may The	 effect	 of	 computer	 viruses	 can	 be	supplied	to	others	who	may	start range from mere annoyance in terms dumping	 a	 host	 of	 advertising	 and of	 some	 on-screen	 display	 (Level-1	 promotional literature into your e-mail virus),	 disruption	 of	 functioning	 box.	 You	 are	 then	 at	 the	 receiving (Level-2	virus)	damage	to	target	data	 end,	with	little	respite	from	receiving files	 (Level-3	 virus),	 to	 complete	 junk mails. destruction	 of	 the	 system	 (Level-4 virus).	Installing	and	timely	updating	 5.7 rEsourcEs rEquirEd for anti-virus	programmes	and	scanning	 succEssfuL E-BusinEss the	files	and	disks	with	them	provides	 impLEmEntation protection	 to	 your	 data	 files,	 folders	 Setting	 up	 of	 any	 business	 requires and	systems	from	virus	attacks.		 money,	men	and	machines	(hardware). Data	may	 be	 intercepted	 in	 the	 For e-business, you require additional course of transmission. For this, one resources	 for	 developing,	 operating, may use cryptography. It refers to maintaining	and	enhancing	a	website the art of protecting information by where	‘site’	means	location	and	‘web’ transforming it (encrypting it) into an means	world	wide	web	(www).	Simply unreadable	format	called	‘cyphertext’.	 speaking,	a	website	is	a	firm’s	location Only	those	who	possess	a	secret	key	 on	 the	 world	 wide	 web.	 Obviously, can decipher (or decrypt) the message website	 is	 not	 a	 physical	 location. into	‘plaintext’.	This	is	similar	to	using	 Rather, it is an online embodiment of ‘code	words’	with	some	one	so	that	others	 all	the	content	that	a	firm	may	like	to do	not	understand	your	conversation. provide	to	others. Key Terms e-Business	 e-Commerce	 	 Browser Virus	 Secure	Sockets	Layer	(SSL)	 Online	trading e-Trading e-Procurement  e-Bidding e-Cash  Business Process Outsourcing Call Centres Verticals	 Horizontals	 	 Captive	BPO	units Sweat-shopping 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   130 9/2/2022   2:12:16 PM EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS 131 SUMMARY The	world	of	business	 is	changing.	e-business	and	outsourcing	are	the	two most	obvious	expressions	of	this	change.	The	trigger	for	the	change	owes	its origin	to	both	internal	and	external	forces.	Internally,	it	is	the	business	firm’s own	quest	for	improvement	and	efficiency	that	has	propelled	it	into	e-business and	 outsourcing.	 Externally,	 the	 ever	mounting	 competitive	 pressures	 and ever	demanding	customers	have	been	the	force	behind	the	change. Electronic mode of doing business, or e-business as it is referred to, presents the	firm	with	promising	opportunities	for	anything,	anywhere	and	anytime	to its	customers,	thereby,	dismantling	the	time	and	space/locational	constraints on its performance. Though e-business is high-tech, it suffers from the limitation	of	being	low	in	personal	touch.	The	customers	as	a	result	do	not get	attended	to	on	an	 interpersonal	basis.	Besides,	 there	are	concerns	over security	 of	 e-transactions	 and	privacy	 of	 those	who	 transact	 business	 over the	internet.	The	benefits	of	e-commerce	also	seem	to	have	accrued	unevenly across	countries	and	across	regions	within	a	country. Apart	 from	 becoming	 digital,	 the	 firms	 are	 also	 resorting	 to	 a	 departure from	 the	 erstwhile	 ‘do	 it	 all	 by	 yourself’	 mindset.	 They	 are	 increasingly contracting	 out	manufacturing,	 R	 and	 D	 as	 well	 as	 of	 business	 processes irrespective	 of	whether	 these	are	 IT	 enabled	or	not.	 India	 is	 riding	high	on the global outsourcing business and has gained considerably in terms of employment generation, capability building and contribution to exports and	GDP. Together,	 the	 two	 trends	 of	 e-business	 and	 outsourcing	 are	 reshaping	 the way	 business	 is	 and	will	 be	 conducted.	 Interestingly,	 both	 e-business	 and outsourcing	are	continuing	to	evolve,	and	that	is	why	these	are	referred	to	as the emerging modes of business. EXERCISES Short Answer Questions 1. State	any	three	differences	between	e-business	and	traditional	business. 2.	 Describe	briefly	any	two	applications	of	e-business. 3.	 Describe	briefly	the	data	storage	and	transmission	risks	in	e-business. 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   131 9/2/2022   2:12:16 PM 132 BUSINESS  STUDIES Long Answer Questions 1. Why are e-business and outsourcing referred to as the emerging modes of business?	Discuss	 the	 factors	 responsible	 for	 the	 growing	 importance	 of these trends. 2.	 Elaborate	the	steps	involved	in	on-line	trading. 3.	 Evaluate	the	need	for	outsourcing	and	discuss	its	limitations. 4. Discuss	the	salient	aspects	of	B2C	commerce. 5. Discuss	 the	 limitations	 of	 electronic	 mode	 of	 doing	 business.	 Are	 these limitations	 severe	 enough	 to	 restrict	 its	 scope?	 Give	 reasons	 for	 your answer. Projects/Assignments 1. Compare	 and	 contrast	 the	 products	 and	 their	 prices	 available	 on	 the internet and in retail shops. Is the quality, customer satisfaction and other factors the same? 2.	 Study	 any	 business	 unit/company	 which	 is	 using	 e-commerce, e-business	 as	 a	 way	 of	 doing	 business.	 Interview	 some	 people	 working there	 and	 find	 out	 the	 advantages	 in	 practical	 business	 in	 terms	 of	 its costs also. 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   132 9/2/2022   2:12:16 PM