Chapter 4 Business services LEARNING OBJECTIVES After studying this chapter, you should be able to: •	 state the characteristics of services; •	 distinguish services from goods; •	 classify different types of business services; •	 explain the concept of e-banking; •	 identify and classify different types of insurance policies; and •	 describe different types of warehouses. 2024-25 Chapter 4.indd   79 31-12-2020   11:55:08 80 BUSINESS  STUDIES All of us have seen a petrol pump. Have your ever thought how a petrol pump owner does his business in a village? How he gets the petrol and diesel to the villages in the interior? How he gets the money to purchase large quantities of petrol and diesel? How he communicates to petrol depots for requirement and also to customers? How he safeguards himself from various risks associated with this business? The answer to all the above questions lies in the understanding of	business	services.	The	transportation	of	petrol	and	diesel	from	oil	refineries	to petrol pumps is carried out by train and tankers (transport services).  They are then stored at various depots of oil companies situated in all major towns across India (warehousing services). Petrol pump owners use postal, mail and telephone facilities to be in touch with customers, banks and the depots for the availability of their requirements on regular basis (communication services). As oil companies always sell the petrol and diesel on advance payment, the owners have to take loans and advances from banks to fund their purchases (banking services). Petrol and diesel being highly risky products, the owners have to safeguard themselves from various risks by getting the business, the products, the life of people working there, etc., insure (insurance services). Thus, we see that a single business of providing petrol and diesel at a petrol pump is actually a collective outcome of various business services. These services are being utilised in the entire process of	shipment	of	petrol	and	diesel	from	oil	refineries	to	the	point	of	sale	at	petrol pumps, spread across the length and breath of India. 4.1 introduction the item or good and the service performed. You must all have, at some time or the For a layperson, services are other experienced the effect of business essentially intangibles. Their purchase activities on your lives. Let us examine does not result in the ownership of few examples of business activity i.e., anything physical. For example, you purchasing ice cream from a store can only seek advice from the doctor, and eating ice cream in a restaurant, you cannot purchase him. Services are watching a movie in a cinema hall all those economic activities that are purchasing a school bus and leasing intangible and imply an interaction to it from a transporter. If you analyse be realised between the service provider all these activities, you will observe and the consumer. that there is a difference between Services are those separately purchasing and eating, purchasing identifiable, essentially intangible and watching and purchasing and activities that provides satisfaction of leasing. What is common in all of them wants, and are not necessarily linked to is that one is purchasing an item and the sale of a product or another service. the other is experiencing a service. But A good is a physical product capable there	is	definitely	a	difference	between	 of being delivered to a purchaser and 2024-25 Chapter 4.indd   80 31-12-2020   11:55:08 BUSINESS SERVICES 81 involves the transfer of ownership from (iii) Inseparability:    Another seller to customer. Goods are also important characteristic of services generally used to refer to commodities is the simultaneous activity of or items of all types, except services, production and consumption being involved in trade or commerce. performed. This makes the production and consumption of services seem 4.2 nature of services to be inseparable. While we can There	are	five	basic	features	of	services.	 manufacture a car today and sell These features also distinguish them it after, say, a month; this is often from goods and are known as the not possible with services that have five	Is	of	services.	These	are	discussed	 to be consumed as and when they as below: are produced. Service providers may ( i )  Intangibil ity:  Services are design a substitute for the person by intangible, i.e., they cannot be touched. using appropriate technology but the They are experiential in nature. One interaction with the customer remains cannot taste a doctor’s treatment, a key feature of services. Automated or touch entertainment. One can Teller Machines (ATMs) may replace only experience it. An important the	banking	clerk	for	the	front	office implication of this is that quality of activities like cash withdrawal and the offer can often not be determined cheque deposit. But, at the same before consumption and, therefore, time, the presence of the customer, is purchase. It is, therefore, important required and his/her interaction with for the service providers that they the process has to be managed. consciously work on creating a desired (iv) Inventory (Less): Services have service so that the customer undergoes little or no tangible components a favourable experience. For example, and, therefore, cannot be stored for treatment by a doctor should be a a future use. That is, services are favourable experience. perishable and providers can, at best, (ii) Inconsistency: The second store some associated goods but not important characteristic of services is inconsistency. Since there is no the service itself. This means that standard tangible product, services the demand and supply needs to be have to be performed exclusively managed as the service has to be each time. Different customers have performed as and when the customer different demands and expectations. asks for it. They cannot be performed Service providers need to have an earlier to be consumed at a later date. opportunity to alter their offer to For example, a railway ticket can be closely meet the requirements of the stored but the railway journey will be customers. This is happening, for experienced only when the railways example, in the case of mobile services. provides it. 2024-25 Chapter 4.indd   81 31-12-2020   11:55:08 82 BUSINESS  STUDIES (v) Involvement: One of the most sold at the consumption point, there important characteristics of services are no inventories. On the basis of is the participation of the customer above features, we can have following in the service delivery process. A points of distinction between goods customer has the opportunity to get and services. the services modified according to specific	requirements. 4.3 types of services When speaking of the service sector, 4.2.1 Difference between Services services	 can	 be	 classified	 into	 three and Goods broad categories, viz., business From the above, it is clear that the two services, social services and personal main differentiating characteristics services. These have been explained in of services and goods are non- the following pages. transferability of ownership and (i) Business Services: Business presence of both provider as well as services are those services which are consumer. While goods are produced, used by business enterprises for the services are performed. A service is conduct of their activities. For example, an act which cannot be taken home. banking, insurance, transportation, What we can take home is the effect warehousing  and communication of the services. And as the services are services. Difference between Services and Goods Basis Services Goods Nature An activity or process. e.g., A physical object. e.g., watching a movie in a cinema hall video cassette of movie Type Heterogeneous Homogenous Intangibility Intangible e.g., doctor treatment Tangible e.g., medicine Different customers having Different customers getting Inconsistency different demands e.g., mobile standardised demands services fulfilled.	e.g.,	mobile	phones Simultaneous production and Separation of production and Inseparability consumption. e.g., eating  consumption. e.g., purchasing ice-cream in a restaurant ice cream from a store Inventory Cannot be kept in stock. e.g., Can be kept in stock. e.g., experience of a train journey train journey ticket Participation of customers at the Involvement at the time of Involvement time of service delivery. e.g.,  delivery not possible. e.g., self-service in a fast food joint manufacturing a vehicle 2024-25 Chapter 4.indd   82 31-12-2020   11:55:08 BUSINESS SERVICES 83 (ii) Social Services: Social services and more dependant on specialised are those services that are generally business services. Business enterprises provided voluntarily in pursuit of look towards banks for availability certain social goals. These social goals of funds; insurance companies for may be to improve the standard of getting their plant, machinery, goods, living for weaker sections of society, etc., insured; transport companies for to provide educational services to their transporting	raw	material;	and	finished children, or to provide health care and goods, and telecom and postal services hygienic conditions in slum areas. for being in touch with their vendors, These services are usually provided suppliers and customers. Today’s voluntarily but for some consideration globalised world has ushered in a to cover their costs. For example, rapid change in the service industry in health care and education services India. India has been gaining a highly provided by certain Non-government competitive edge over other countries organisations (NGOs) and government when it comes to providing services to agencies. the developed economies of the world. (iii) Personal Services: Personal Many foreign companies are looking to services are those services which are India for performing a host of business experienced differently by different services. They are even transferring a customers. These services cannot part of their business operations to be consistent in nature. They will be performed in India. We will discuss differ depending upon the service these in detail in the next chapter. provider. They will also depend upon customer’s preferences and demands. 4.4 Banking For example, tourism, recreational Commercial banks are an important services, restaurants. institution of the economy for providing I n  t h e  c o n t e x t  o f  b e t t e r institutional credit to its customers. understanding of the business A banking company in India is the world, we wil l  be l imiting our one which transacts the business of further	discussions	to	the	first	category	 banking which means accepting, for of the service sector i.e., business the purpose of lending and investment services. of deposits of money from the public, repayable on demand or otherwise 4.3.1 Business Services and withdrawable by cheques, draft, Today’s world is of tough competition, order or otherwise. In simple terms, where the survival of the fittest is a bank accepts money on deposits, the rule. There is no room for non- repayable on demand and also earns performance, and hence companies a	margin	of	profit	by	lending	money.	A tend to stick to what they can do best. bank stimulates economic activity in the In order to be competitive, business market by dealing in money. It mobilises enterprises, are becoming more the savings of people and makes funds 2024-25 Chapter 4.indd   83 31-12-2020   11:55:08 84 BUSINESS  STUDIES available	 to	business	financing	 their	 Public sectors banks are those in capital and revenue expenditure. It which the government has a major also	deals	in	financial	instruments	and stake and they usually need to provides	financial	services	for	a	price,	 emphasise on social objectives than i.e., interest, discount, commission, etc. on	profitability.	Private	sector	banks Banking and Social Objectives In the recent past there has been a concerted effort by the policy makers in reorienting banking towards achieving social objectives. There has been a major shift in the banking policy of the country: from    to (i) Urban orientation — Rural orientation (ii) Class banking  — Mass banking (iii) Traditional  — Innovative practices (iv) Short term objectives — Development objectives 4.4.1 Type of Banks are owned, managed and controlled by private promoters and they are free The focus of banking is varied, the to operate as per market forces. There needs diverse and methods different. are a number of public sector banks Thus, we need distinctive kinds of like SBI, PNB, IOB etc., and other banks to cater to the above mentioned private sector banks represented complexities. by HDFC Bank, ICICI Bank, Kotak Banks can	be	 classified	 into	 the	 Mahindra Bank and Jammu and following: Kashmir Bank. 1. Commercial banks (ii) Cooperative Banks: Cooperative 2. Cooperative banks Banks are governed by the provisions 3. Specialised banks of State Cooperative Societies Act 4. Central bank and meant essentially for providing cheap credit to their members. It is an (i)   Commercial Banks: Commercial important source of rural credit, i.e., banks are institutions dealing in agricultural	financing	in	India. money. These are governed by Indian (iii) Specialised Banks: Specialised Banking Regulation Act 1949 and banks are foreign exchange banks, according to it banking means industrial banks, development banks, accepting deposits of money from the export-import banks catering to public for the purpose of lending or specific	needs	of	these	unique	activities. investment. There are two types of These	banks	provide	financial	aid	 to commercial banks, public sector and industries, heavy  turnkey projects private sector banks. and foreign trade. 2024-25 Chapter 4.indd   84 31-12-2020   11:55:09 BUSINESS SERVICES 85 (iv) Central Bank: The Central bank premature withdrawal is permissible of any country supervises, controls with a percentage of interest being and regulates the activities of all the forfeited. commercial banks of that country. It ( ii )  Lending of funds:  Second also acts as a government  banker. major activity of commercial banks It controls and coordinates currency is to provide loans and advances and credit policies of any country. The out of the money received through Reserve Bank of India is the central deposits. These advances can be bank of our country. made in the form of overdrafts, cash credits, discounting trade bills, term 4.4.2 Functions of Commercial  loans, consumer credits and other Banks miscellaneous advances. The funds Banks perform a variety of functions. lent out by banks contribute a great Some of them are the basic or primary deal to trade, industry, transport and other business activities. functions of a bank while others are (iii) Cheque facility: Banks render agency or general utility services in a very important service to their nature. The important functions are customers by collecting their cheques briefly	discussed	below: drawn on other banks. The cheque is (i) Acceptance of deposits: Deposits the most developed credit instrument, are the basis of the loan operations a unique feature and function of banks since banks are both borrowers and for the withdrawal of deposits. It is the lenders of money. As borrowers they most convenient and an inexpensive pay interest and as lenders they grant medium of exchange. There are two loans and get interest. These deposits types of cheques mainly (a) bearer are generally taken through current cheques, which are encashable account,	 savings	 account	 and	 fixed	 immediately at bank counters and deposits. Current account deposits (b) crossed cheques which are to be can be withdrawn to the extent of the deposited only in the payees account. balance at any time without any prior (iv) Remittance of funds: Another notice. salient function of commercial banks is Sav ings  a c coun t s  a r e  f o r of providing the facility of fund transfer encouraging savings by individuals. from one place to another, on account Banks pay rate of interest as decided of the interconnectivity of branches. by RBI on these deposits. Withdrawal The transfer of funds is administered from these accounts has some by using bank drafts, pay orders or restrictions in relation to the amount mail transfers, on nominal commission as well as number of times in a given charges. The bank issues a draft for period. Fixed accounts are time the amount on its own branches at deposits with higher rate of interest as other places or other banks at those compared to the savings accounts. A places. The payee can present the draft 2024-25 Chapter 4.indd   85 31-12-2020   11:55:09 86 BUSINESS  STUDIES on the drawee bank at his place and internet. These type of services provided collect the amount. by the banks on the internet, called (v) Allied services: In addition to e-banking, lowers the transaction cost, above functions, banks also provide adds value to the banking relationship allied services such as bill payments, and empowers customers. e-banking locker facilities, underwriting services. is electronic banking or banking using They also perform other services electronic media. Thus, e-banking is a like buying and selling of shares service provided by many banks, that and debentures on instructions and allows, a customer to conduct banking other personal services like payment transactions, such as managing of insurance premium, collection of savings, checking accounts, applying dividend etc. for loans or paying bills over the internet using a personal computer, 4.4.3 e-Banking mobile te lephone or handheld The growth of Internet and e-commerce computer (personal digital assistant) is dramatically changing everyday The range of services offered by life, with the world wide web and e-banking are: Automated Teller e-commerce transforming the world Machines (ATM) and Point of Sales into a digital global village. The latest (PoS), Electronic Data Interchange wave in information technology is (EDI) and Credit Cards Electronic or internet banking. It is a part of virtual Digital cash and Electronic bank banking and another delivery channel transfer (EFT). The two ways in which for customers. EFT can be done are: NEFT (National In simple terms, Internet banking Electronic Fund Transfer) and RTGS means any user with a PC and a (Real Time Gross Settlement). browser can get connected to the banks website to perform any of the Benefits virtual banking functions and avail There	are	various	benefits	of	e-banking of any of the bank’s services. There provided to customers which are: is no human operator to respond to  (i) E-banking facilitates digital the needs of the customer. The bank p a y m e n t s  a n d  p r o m o t e s has a centralised data base that is t ransparency  in  f inanc ia l web-enabled. All the services that the statements. bank has permitted on the internet are   (ii) e-banking provides 24 hours, displayed on a menu. Any service can 365 days a year services to the be selected and further interaction is customers of the bank; dictated by the nature of service.  (iii) Customers can make some of the In this new digital market place permitted	transactions	from	office banks	and	financial	institutions	have	 or house or while travelling  via started providing services over the mobile telephone; 2024-25 Chapter 4.indd   86 31-12-2020   11:55:09 BUSINESS SERVICES 87 Types of Digital Payments 2024-25 Chapter 4.indd   87 31-12-2020   11:55:09 88 BUSINESS  STUDIES (iv)	 It	inculcates	a	sense	of	financial	 buildings or heavy equipments or other discipline by recording each and assets is not possible unless there is every transaction; arrangement for covering the risks, (v) Greater customer satisfaction by with the help of insurance. Keeping offering unlimited access to the this in mind, people facing common bank, not limited by the walls risks come together and make small of the branch and less risk and contributions to a common fund, greater security to the customer which helps to spread the loss caused as they can avoid travelling with to an individual by a particular risk cash. over a number of persons who are The banks also stand to gain by exposed to it. e-banking.	The	benefits	are: Insurance is thus a device by (i) e-banking provides competitive which the loss likely to be caused by advantage to the bank; (ii) e-banking provides unlimited an uncertain event is spread over a network to the bank and is not number of persons who are exposed limited to the number of branches, to it and who prepare to insure Any PC connected to a modem and themselves against such an event. a telephone having an internet It is a contract or agreement under connection can provide cash which one party agrees in return for a withdrawl needs of the customer; consideration to pay an agreed amount (iii) Load on branches can be of money to another party to make a c ons id e rab l y  r educed  by loss, damage or injury to something establishing centralised data of value in which the insured has a base and by taking over some of pecuniary interest as a result of some the accounting functions. uncertain event. The agreement/ contract is put in writing and is known 4.5 insurance as ‘policy’. The person whose risk is Life is full of uncertainties. The chances insured	is	called	‘insured’	and	the	firm of occurrence of an event causing losses which insures the risk of loss is known are quite uncertain. There are risks of as insurer/assurance underwriter. death	and	disability	for	human	life;	fire	 4.5.1 Fundamental principle of and burglary risk for property; perils of the sea for shipment of goods and, Insurance so on. If any of these takes place, the The basic principle of insurance is that individuals and/or, organisations may an individual or a business concern suffer a great loss, sometimes beyond chooses	 to	spend	a	definitely	known their capacities to bear the same. It sum in place of a possible huge amount is to minimise the impact of such involved	 in	an	 indefinite	 future	 loss. uncertainties that there is a need Thus insurance is the substitution of for insurance. Investment in factory a small periodic payment (premium) 2024-25 Chapter 4.indd   88 31-12-2020   11:55:09 BUSINESS SERVICES 89 for a risk of large possible loss. The risk of loss. There are uncertainties loss of risk still remains but the loss of happenings of time and amount is spread over a large number of of loss. Insurance removes these policyholders exposed to the same risk. uncertainties and the assured receives The premium paid by them are pooled payment of loss. The insurer charges out of which the loss sustained by any premium for providing the certainity. policy holder is compensated. Thus, (ii) Protection: The second main risks are shared with others. From the function of insurance is to provide analysis of past events the insurer (an protection from probable chances insurance company or an underwriter) of loss. Insurance cannot stop the knows the probable losses caused by happening of a risk or event but can each type of risk covered by insurance. compensate for losses arising out of it. Insurance, therefore, is a form of (iii) Risk sharing: On the happening risk management primarily used to of a risk event, the loss is shared by all safe guard against the risk of potential the persons exposed to it. The share is financial	 loss.	 Ideally,	 insurance	 is	 obtained from every insured member defined	as	the	equitable	transfer	of	the	 by way of premiums. risk of a potential loss, from one entity (iv) Assist in capital formation: The to another, in exchange for a reasonable accumulated funds of the insurer fee. Insurance company, therefore, is received by way of premium payments an association, corporation or an made by the insured are invested in organisation engaged in the business various income generating schemes. of paying all legitimate claims that may arise, in exchange for a fee (known as 4.5.3 Principles of Insurance premium). Insurance is a social device in The principles of insurance are the which a group of individuals (insured) rules of action or conduct adopted transfers risk to another party (insurer) by the stakeholders involved in the in order to combine loss experience, insurance business. The specific which provides for payment of losses principles	of	utmost	significance	to	a from funds contributed (premium) valid insurance contract consists of by all members. Insurance is meant to the following: protect the insured, against uncertain (i) Utmost good faith: A contract of events, which may cause disadvantage insurance is a contract of uberrimae to him. fidei i.e., a contract found on utmost good faith. Both the insurer and the 4.5.2 Functions of Insurance insured should display good faith The various functions of insurance are towards each other in regard to the as follows: contract. It is the duty of the insured (i) Providing certainty: Insurance to voluntarily make full, accurate provides certainity of payment for the disclosure of all facts, material to the 2024-25 Chapter 4.indd   89 31-12-2020   11:55:09 90 BUSINESS  STUDIES risk being proposed and the insurer to ( i i i )  Indemnity:  All  insurance make clear all the terms and conditions contracts	of	fire	or	marine	insurance in the insurance contract. Thus, it is are contracts of indemnity. According binding on the proposer to disclose all to it, the insurer undertakes to put material facts about the subject matter the insured, in the event of loss, in of the proposed insurance. Any fact, the same position that he occupied which is likely to affect the mind of  a immediately before the happening of prudent insurer in deciding to accept the event insured against. In other the	proposal	of	insurance	or	in	fixing	 words the insurer undertakes to the rate of premium is material for this compensate the insured for the loss purpose. Failure to make disclosure of caused to him/her due to damage or material facts by the insured makes destruction of property insured. The the contract of insurance voidable at compensation payable and the loss the discretion of the insurer.  suffered are to be measured in terms (ii) Insurable Interest: The insured of money. The principle of indemnity is must have an insurable interest in not applicable to life insurance. the subject matter of insurance. One (iv) Proximate Cause: According to fundamental fact of this principle this principle, an insurance policy is is that ‘it is not the house, ship, designed to provide compensation only machinery, potential liability of life for such losses as are caused by the that is insured, but it is the pecuniary perils which are stated in the policy. interest of the insured in them, When the loss is the result of two or which is insured.’ Insurable interest more causes, the proximate cause means some pecuniary interest in means the direct, the most dominant the subject matter of the insurance and most effective cause of which contract. The insured must have an the loss is the natural consequence. interest in the preservation of the In case of loss arising out of any thing or life insured, so that he/she mishap, the most proximate cause will	suffer	financially	on	the	happening	 of the mishap should be taken into of the event against which he/she consideration. is insured. In case of insurance of (v) Subrogation: It refers to the right property, insurable interest of the of the insurer to stand in the place insured in the subject matter of the of the insured, after settlement of a insurance must exist at the time of claim,  as far as the right of insured in happening of the event. In order to respect of recovery from an alternative name insurable interest however, it is source is involved. After the insured is not necessary that one should be the compensated for the loss or damage to owner of the property. For example, the property insured by him/her the a trustee holding property on behalf right of ownership of such property of others has an insurable interest in passes on to the insurer. This is the property. because the insured should not be 2024-25 Chapter 4.indd   90 31-12-2020   11:55:09 BUSINESS SERVICES 91 allowed	to	make	any	profit,	by	selling	 business. Broadly speaking, insurance the damaged property or in the case of may be classified	as	follows: lost property being recovered. (vi) Contribution: As per this principle Life insurance it is the right of an insurer who has paid Since life itself is uncertain, all claim under an insurance, to call upon individuals try to assure themselves other liable insurers to contribute for of a certain sum of money in the future the loss of payment. It implies, that in to take care of unforeseen events or case of double insurance, the insurers happenings. Individuals in the course are to share the losses in proportion to of their life are always exposed to some the amount assured by each of them. kind of risks. In case there is a loss, when there The risk may be of an event which is more than one policy on the same is certain that is death. In that case, property, the insured will have no right what will happen to the other members to recover more than the full amount of the family who are dependent on of his actual loss. If the full amount is a particular individuals income. The recovered from one insurer the right to other risk may be living too long in obtain further payment from the other which an individual may become too insurer will cease. old to earn i.e., retirement. In this case (vii) Mitigation: This principle states also, the earnings will decline or end. that it is the duty of the insured to take Under such circumstances, individuals reasonable steps to minimise the loss seek protection against these risks or damage to the insured property. and life insurance companies offer Suppose goods kept in a store house protection against such risks. catch	fire	then	the	owner	of	the	goods	 A li fe insurance policy was should try to recover the goods and introduced as a protection against save	 them	 from	fire	 to	minimise	 the	 the uncertainity of life. But gradually loss or damage. The insured must its scope has widened and there are behave  with great prudence and not various types of insurance policies be careless just because there is an available to suit the requirements of insurance cover. If reasonable care is an individual. For example, disability not taken like any prudent person then insurance, health/medical insurance, the claim from the insurance company annuity insurance and life insurance may be lost. proper. Life	insurance	may	be	defined	as 4.5.4 Types of Insurance a contract in which the insurer in consideration of a certain premium, Various types of insurance exist either in a lump sum or by other by virtue of practice of insurance periodical payments, agrees to pay to companies	and	the	influence	of	legal	 the assured, or to the person for whose enactments controlling the insurance benefit	the	policy	is	taken,	the	assured 2024-25 Chapter 4.indd   91 31-12-2020   11:55:09 92 BUSINESS  STUDIES sum of money, on the happening of a sort of investment because a certain a	 specified	 event	 contingent	 on	 the	 sum is returnable to the insured at human life or at the expiry of certain the time of death or at the expiry of a period. Thus, the insurance company certain period. undertakes to insure the life of a Life insurance also encourages person in exchange for a sum of money savings as the amount of premium has called premium. This premium may be to be paid regularly. It thus, provides paid in one lump sum, or periodically a sense of security to the insured and i.e., monthly, quarterly, half yearly or his dependents. yearly. At the same time, the company The general principles of insurance promises to pay a certain sum of money discussed in the previous section either on the death of the person or on apply to life insurance also with a few his attaining a certain age (i.e., the exceptions. The main elements of a life expiry of certain period). Thus, the insurance contract are: person	is	sure	that	a	specified	amount	  (i) The life insurance contract will be given to him when he attains a must have all the essentials of a certain age or that his dependents will valid contract. Certain elements get that sum in the event of his death. like offer and acceptance, free This agreement or contract which consent, capacity to enter into contains all the terms and conditions a contract, lawful consideration is put in writing and such document is and lawful object must be present called the policy. The person whose life for the contract to be valid; is insured is called the assured. The  (ii) The contract of life insurance is a insurance company is the insurer and contract of utmost good faith. The the consideration paid by the assured assured should be honest and is the premium. The premium can be truthful in giving information to paid periodically in instalments. the insurance company. He must This insurance provides protection disclose all material facts about to the family at the premature death or his health to the insurer. It is his gives adequate amount at old age when duty to disclose accurately all earning capacities are reduced. The material facts known to him even insurance is not only a protection but is if the insurer does not ask him; Examples of facts to be disclosed Fire insurance:	Construction	of	building,	fire	detection	and	fire	fighting	equipment; nature of its use. Motor insurance: Type of vehicle; driver details. Personal Accident insurance: Age, height, weight, occupation, previous medical history. Life insurance: Age, previous medical history, smoking/drinking habits. 2024-25 Chapter 4.indd   92 31-12-2020   11:55:09 BUSINESS SERVICES 93 (iii) In life insurance, the insured an insurable interest in the life of must have insurable interest his debtor,  and a proprietor of a in the life assured. Without drama company has an insurable insurable interest the contract interest in the lives of the actors; of insurance is void. In case of  (iv) Life insurance contract is not a life insurance, insurable interest contract of indemnity. The life must be present at the time when of a human being cannot be the insurance is affected. It is compensated	and	only	a	specified not necessary that the assured sum of money is paid. That is should have insurable interest why the amount payable in life at the time of maturity also. For insurance on the happening of the example, a person is presumed event	is	fixed	in	advance.	The	sum to have an interest in his own life of	money	payable	is	fixed,	at	the and every part of it, a creditor has time of entering into the contract. 2024-25 Chapter 4.indd   93 31-12-2020   11:55:09 94 BUSINESS  STUDIES A contract of life insurance, (ii) Endowment Life Assurance therefore, is not a contract of Policy: The insurer (Insurance indemnity. Company) undertakes to pay a specified sum when the insured Types of life insurance policies attains a particular age or on his death which ever is earlier. The sum is The document containing the written payable to his legal heir/s or nominee contract between the insurer and named therein in case of death of the the insured alongwith the terms and assured. Otherwise, the sum will be conditions of insurance is called the paid	to	the	assured	after	a	fixed	period Policy. After the proposal form is i.e., till he/she attains a particular age. filled	by	the	insured	(or	the	proposer)	 Thus, the endowment policy matures and the insurer (insurance company) after a limted number of years. accepts the form and the premium, a (iii) Joint Life Policy: This policy is policy is issued to the insurer. taken up by two or more persons. The People have different requirements premium is paid jointly or by either and therefore they would like a policy of them in instalments or lump sum. to	fulfill	all	their	needs.	The	needs	of	 The assured sum or policy money people for life insurance can be family is payable upon the death of any needs, children’s needs, old age and one person to the other survivor or special needs. To meet the needs of survivors. Usually this policy is taken people the insurers have developed up by husband and wife jointly or by different types of products such as two	 partners	 in	 a	 partnership	 firm Whole Life Assurance, Endowment where the amount is payable to the type plans, combination of Whole survivor on the death of either of the Life and Endowment type plans, two. Children’s Assurance plans and (iv) Annuity Policy: Under this policy, Annuity plans. Some of these are the assured sum or policy money is explained below: payable after the assured attains a (i) Whole Life Policy: In this kind certain age in monthly, quarterly, of policy, the amount payable to half yearly or annual instalments. The the insured will not be paid before premium is paid in instalments over a the death of the assured. The sum certain period or single premium may then becomes payable only to the be paid by the assured. This is useful beneficiaries	or	heir	of	the	deceased. to those who prefer a regular income The premium will be payable for after a certain age. a	fixed	period	(20	or	30	years)	or	for	 (v) Children’s Endowment Policy: the whole life of the assured. If the This policy is taken by a person for premium	 is	payable	for	a	fixed	period,	 his/her children to meet the expenses the policy will continue till the death of of their education or marriage. The the assured. agreement states that a certain sum 2024-25 Chapter 4.indd   94 31-12-2020   11:55:09 BUSINESS SERVICES 95 will be paid by the insurer when subject matter of the insurance. the children attain a particular age. Without insurable interest the The premium is paid by the person contract of insurance is void. entering into the contract. However, no In	case	of	fire	insurance,	unlike premium wil be paid, if he dies before life insurance insurable interest the maturity of the policy. must be present both at the time of insurance and at the time of fire insurance loss. For example, a person has Fire insurance is a contract whereby insurable interest in the property the insurer, in consideration of the he owns, a businessman has premium paid, undertakes to make insurable interest in his stock, good any loss or damage caused by plant, machinery and building, an agent has an insurable interest fire during a specified period upto in the property of his principal, a the	 amount	 specified	 in	 the	 policy.	 partner has insurable interest in Normally,	the	fire	insurance	policy	is	 the	property	of	a	partnership	firm, for a period of one year after which it and  a mortgagee has insurable is to be renewed from time to time. The interest in the property, which is premium may be paid either in lump mortgaged. sum or instalments. A claim for loss by	fire	must	satisfy	the	two	following	  (ii) Similar to the life insurance conditions: contract, the contract of fire (i) There must be actual loss; and insurance is a contract of utmost (ii) Fire must be accidental and non- good faith i.e., uberrimae fidei. The insured should be truthful intentional. and honest in giving information The	risk	covered	by	a	fire	insurance	 to the insurance company contract is the loss resulting from regarding the subject matter of fire	or	some	other	cause,	and	which	 the insurance. He is duty-bound is the proximate cause of the loss. If to disclose accurately all facts overheating without ignition causes regarding the nature of property damage, it will not be regarded as a and risks attached to it. The fire	 loss	 within	 the	meaning	 of	 fire	 insurance company should also insurance and the loss will not be disclose the facts of the policy to recoverable from the insurer. the proposer. A	fire	insurance	contract	is	based	  (iii)	 The	contract	of	fire	insurance	is	a on certain fundamental principles contract of strict indemnity. The which have been discussed in general insured can, in the event of loss, principles.	The	main	elements	of	a	fire	 recover the actual amount of loss insurance contract are: from the insurer. This is subject to (i)	 In	fire	insurance,	the	insured	must	 the maximum amount for which have insurable interest in the the subject matter is insured. For 2024-25 Chapter 4.indd   95 31-12-2020   11:55:09 96 BUSINESS  STUDIES example, if a person has insured a certain sum of money  is paid by his house for  ` 4,00,000 the the insured in consideration for the insurer is not necessarily liable guarantee/protection he gets. Marine to pay that amount, although insurance is slightly different from the house may have been totally other types. There are three things destroyed	by	fire;	but	he	will	pay	 involved i.e., ship or hull, cargo or the actual loss after deducting goods, and freight. depreciation within the maximum  (a) Ship or hull insurance: Since the limit of ` 4,00,000. The purpose ship is exposed to many dangers being that a person should not be at sea, the insurance policy is for allowed to gain by insurance. indemnifying the insured for losses (iv) The insurer is liable to compensate caused by damage to the ship. only	when	fire	 is	 the	 proximate	  (b) Cargo insurance: The cargo while cause of damage or loss. being transported by ship is subject to many risks. These may be at Marine insurance port i.e., risk of theft, lost goods or on voyage etc. Thus, an insurance A marine insurance contract is an policy can be issued to cover agreement whereby the insurer against such risks to cargo. undertakes to indemnify the insured in  (c) Freight insurance: If the cargo the manner and to the extent thereby does not reach the destination agreed against marine losses. Marine due to damage or loss in transit, insurance provides protection against the shipping company is not paid loss by marine perils or perils of the freight charges. Freight insurance sea.  Marine perils are collision of ship is for reimbursing the loss of freight with the rock, or ship attacked by the to the shipping company i.e., the enemies,	fire	and	captured	by	pirates	 insured. and actions of the captains and crew The fundamental principles of of the ship. These perils cause damage, marine insurance are the same as the destruction or disappearance of the general principles. The main elements ship and cargo and non-payment of of a marine insurance contract are: freight. So, marine insurance insures  (i) Unlike life insurance, the contract ship hull, cargo and freight. Thus, it is a of marine insurance is a contract device wherein the insurer undertakes of indemnity. The insured can, to compensate the owner of a ship or in the event of loss recover the cargo for complete or partial loss at sea. actual amount of loss from the The insurer gurantees to make good the insurer. Under no circumstances, losses due to damage to the ship or the insured is allowed to make cargo arising out of the risks incidental profit	out	of	the	marine	insurance to sea voyages. The insurer in this contract. But cargo policies case is known as the underwriter and provide commercial indemnity 2024-25 Chapter 4.indd   96 31-12-2020   11:55:09 BUSINESS SERVICES 97 Difference between Life, Fire and Marine Insurance Basis of difference Life Insurance Fire Insurance Marine Insurance 1. Subject The subject matter of The subject matter The subject matter Matter insurance is human is any physical is a ship, cargo  or life. property or assets. freight. Life Insurance has the Fire insurance has Marine insurance 2. Element elements of protection only the element and investment or of protection and has only the both. not the element of element of investment. protection. Insurable interest Insurable interest must be present at on the subject Insurable interest the time of effecting matter must be must be present 3. Insurable present both at the time when interest the policy but need not be necessary at at the time of claim falls due or the time when the effecting policy as at the time of loss claim falls due. well as when the only. claim falls due. Life insurance policy usually exceeds a 4. Duration year and is taken for Fire insurance Marine insurance longer periods ranging policy usually does policy is for one or not exceed a year. period of voyage or from 5 to 30 years or mixed. whole life. Fire insurance is a contract of Marine insurance Life insurance is  not indemnity. The is a contract of based on the principle insured can claim indemnity. The of  indemnity. The only the actual insured can claim 5. Indemnity sum assured is amount of loss the market value paid either on the from the insurer. of the ship and happening of certain The loss due to the cost of goods event or on maturity fire	is	indemnified	 destroyed at sea of the policy. subject to the and the loss will maximum limit of be	indemnified. the policy amount. 6. Loss Loss is not Loss is Loss is measurement measurable. measurable. measurable. 2024-25 Chapter 4.indd   97 31-12-2020   11:55:09 98 BUSINESS  STUDIES Surrender Life insurance policy Fire insurance Marine insurance 7. value or paid has a surrender value does not have any does not have any up value or paid up value. surrender value or surrender value or paid up value. paid up value. In	fire	insurance,	 In marine One can insure for the amount of insurance the 8. Policy amount any amount in life the policy cannot amount of the insurance. be more than policy can be the the value of the market value of the subject matter. ship or cargo. The event i.e., There is an element of destruction by The event i.e., certainity. The event fire	may	not	 loss at sea may 9. Contingency i.e., death of maturity happen. There not occur and of risk or policy is bound to is an element of there may be no happen. Therefore a uncertainity and claim. There is claim will be present. there may be no an element of claim. uncertainty. rather than strict indemnity. The  (iv) The principle of causa proxima insurers promise to indemnify the will apply to it. The insurance insured “in the manner and to the company will be liable to pay extent agreed.” In case of ‘Hull only if that particular or nearest Policy’, the amount insured is cause is covered by the policy. fixed	at	a	level		above	the	current	 For example, if a loss is caused market value; by several reasons then nearest (ii) Similar	to	life	and	fire	insurance,	 cause of loss will be considered. the contract of marine insurance Refer to page 105 for types of is a contract of utmost good faith. insurance and social secuirty Both the insured and insurer scheme. must disclose everything, which is in their knowledge and can 4.6 coMMunication services affect the insurance contract. The insured is duty-bound to Communication services are helpful accurately disclose  all facts to the business for establishing which include the nature of links with the outside world viz., shipment and the risk of damage suppliers, customers, competitors etc. it is exposed to; Business does not exist in isolation, (iii) Insurable interest must exist at it has to communicate with others for the time of loss but not necessary transmission of ideas and information. at the time when the policy was Communication services need to taken; be	 very	 efficient,	 accurate	 and	 fast 2024-25 Chapter 4.indd   98 13-01-2021   09:41:44 BUSINESS SERVICES 99 for them to be effective. In this fast Postal department also offers allied moving and competitive world it is facilities of the following types: essential to have advanced technology  1. Greeting post — A range of for quick exchange of information. The delightful greeting cards for every electronic media is mainly responsible occasion. for this transformation. The main  2. Media post — An innovative services which help business can be and  e f f e c t i v e  v eh i c l e  f o r classified	into	postal	and	telecom.		 Indian corporates to advertise their brand through postcards, Postal Services envelopes, aerograms, tele-grams, Indian post and telegraph department and also through letterboxes. provides various postal services across  3. Direct post is for direct advertising. India. For providing these services the It can be both addressed as well whole country has been divided into 22 as unaddressed.