Chapter 11 InternatIonal BusIness LEARNING OBJECTIVES After studying this chapter, you should be able to: •	 State the meaning of International Business •	 Distinguish between Internal and International Business •	 Discuss the scope of International Business •	 Enumerate	the	benefits	of	International	Business •	 Discuss the documents required for import and export transactions •	 Identify	the	incentives	and	schemes	available	for	international	firms •	 Discuss the role of different organisations for the promotion of International Business •	 List the major international institutions and agreements at the global level for the promotion of international trade and development. 2024-25 Chapter 11.indd   246 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 247 Mr. Sudhir Manchanda is a small manufacturer of automobile components. His factory is located in Gurgaon and employs about 55 workers with an investment of Rs. 9.2 million in plant and machinery. Due to recession in the domestic market, he foresees prospects of his sales going up in the next few years in the domestic market. He is exploring the possibility of going international. Some of his competitors are already in export business. A casual talk with one of his close friends in the tyre business reveals that there is a substantial market for automobile components and accessories in South-East Asia and Middle East. But his friend also tells him, “Doing business internationally is not the same as carrying out business within the home country. International business is more complex as one has to operate under market conditions that are different from those that one faces in domestic business”. Mr. Manchanda is, moreover, not sure as to how he should go about setting up international business. Should he himself identify and contact some overseas customers and start exporting directly to them or else route his products through export houses which specialise in exporting products made by others? Mr. Manchanda’s son who has just returned after an MBA in USA suggests that they should set up a fully owned factory in Bangkok for supplying to customers in South-East Asia and Middle East. Setting up a manufacturing plant there will help them save costs of transporting goods from India. This would also help them coming	closer	to	the	overseas	customers.	Mr.	Manchanda	is	in	a	fix	as	to	what	to do.	In	the	face	of	difficulties	involved	in	overseas	ventures	as	pointed	out	by	his friend, he is wondering about the desirability of entering into global business. He is also not sure as to what the different ways of entering into international market are and which one will best suit his purpose. 11.1 IntroductIon The prime reason behind this radical change is the development Countries all over the world are of communication, technology, undergoing a fundamental shift in infrastructure etc. Emergence of the way they produce and market newer modes of communication and various products and services. The development of faster and more national economies which so far were efficient	means	of	transportation	have pursuing the goal of self-reliance are brought nations closer to one another. now becoming increasingly dependent Countries that were cut-off from one upon others for procuring as well as another due to geographical distances supplying various kinds of goods and and socio-economic differences have services. Due to increased cross border now started increasingly interacting trade and investments, countries are with others. World Trade Organisation no more isolated. (WTO) and reforms carried out by the 2024-25 Chapter 11.indd   247 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM 248 BUSINESS  STUDIES governments of different countries India has been trading with other have also been a major contributory countries for a long time. But it has factor to the increased interactions of late considerably speeded up its and business relations amongst the process of integrating with the world nations. economy and increasing its foreign We are today living in a world trade and investments (see Box A: where the obstacles to cross-border India Embarks on the Path to movement of goods and persons have Globalisation). substantially come down. The national economies are increasingly becoming 11.1.1 Meaning of International borderless and getting integrated into Business the world economy.  Little wonder that the world has today come to be Business transaction taking place known as a ‘global village’. Business in within the geographical boundaries the present day is no longer restricted of a nation is known as domestic or to the boundaries of the domestic national business. It is also referred country. More and more firms are to as internal business or home trade. making forays into international Manufacturing and trade beyond the business which presents them with boundaries of one’s own country is numerous opportunities for growth known as international business. and	increased	profits.	 International or external business can, Box A India Embarks on the Path to Globalisation International business has entered into a new era of reforms. India too did not remain cut-off from these developments. India was under a severe debt trap and was facing crippling balance of payment crisis. In 1991, it approached the International Monetary	Fund	(IMF)	for	raising	funds	to	tide	over	its	balance	of	payment	deficits. IMF agreed to lend money to India subject to the condition that India would undergo structural changes to be able to ensure repayment of borrowed funds. India had no alternative but to agree to the proposal. It was the very conditions imposed by IMF which more or less forced India to liberalise its economic policies. Since then a fairly large amount of liberalisation at the economic front has taken place. Though the process of reforms has somewhat slowed down, India is very much on the path to globalisation and integrating with the world economy. While, on the one hand, many multinational corporations (MNCs) have ventured into Indian market for selling their products and services; many Indian companies too have stepped out of the country to market their products and services to consumers in foreign countries. 2024-25 Chapter 11.indd   248 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 249 therefore,	be	defined	as	those	business	 11.1.2 Reason for International activities that take place across the Business national frontiers. It involves not The fundamental reason behind only the international movements of international business is that the goods and services, but also of capital, countries cannot produce equally well personnel, technology and intellectual or cheaply all that they need. This is property like patents, trademarks, because of the unequal distribution know-how and copyrights. of natural resources among them It may be mentioned here that or differences in their productivity mostly people think of international levels. Availability of various factors business as international trade. But of production such as labour, capital this is not true. No doubt international and raw materials that are required for trade, comprising exports and imports producing different goods and services of goods, has historically been an differ among nations. Moreover, labour important component of international productivity and production costs business. But of late, the scope differ among nations due to various of  internat ional  business has socio-economic, geographical and substantially expanded. International political reasons. trade in services such as international Due to these differences, it is not travel and tourism, transportation, uncommon to find one particular communication, banking, ware- country being in a better position to housing, distribution and advertising produce better quality products and/ has considerably grown. The other or at lower costs than what other equally important developments are nations can do.  In other words, we increased foreign investments and can say that some countries are in an overseas production of goods and advantageous position in producing select goods and services which services. Companies have started other countries cannot produce that increasingly making investments into effectively	 and	 efficiently,	 and	 viceforeign countries and undertaking versa.	As	a	result,	each	country	finds	it production of goods and services in advantageous to produce those select foreign countries to come closer to goods and services that it can produce foreign customers and serve them more effectively and efficiently at more effectively at lower costs. All these home, and procuring the rest through activities form part of international trade with other countries which the business. To conclude, we can say other countries can produce at lower that international business is a much costs.  This is precisely the reason as broader term and is comprised of both to why countries trade with others the trade and production of goods and and engage in what is known as services across frontiers. international business. 2024-25 Chapter 11.indd   249 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM 250 BUSINESS  STUDIES The international business as it firms	 from	engaging	 in	 international exists today is to a great extent the business in a later section. result of geographical specialisation as pointed out above. Fundamentally, it 11.1.3 International Business vs. is for the same reason that domestic Domestic Business trade between two states or regions within a country takes place. Most Conducting and managing international states or regions within a country business operations is more complex tend to specialise in the production than undertaking domestic business. of goods and services for which they Because of variations in political, social, are best suited. In India, for example, cultural and economic environments while West Bengal specialises in jute across	countries,	business	firms	find products; Mumbai and neighbouring it	 difficult	 to	 extend	 their	 domestic areas in Maharashtra are more involved business strategy to foreign markets. with the production of cotton textiles. To be successful in the overseas The same principle of territorial markets, they need to adapt their division of labour is applicable at the product, pricing, promotion and international level too. Most developing distribution strategies and overall countries which are labour abundant, business plans to suit the specific for instance, specialise in producing requirements of the target foreign and exporting garments. Since they markets (see Box B on Firms need lack capital and technology, they to be Cognisant of Environmental import textile machinery from the Differences). Key aspects in respect developed nations which the latter of which domestic and international are in a position to produce more businesses differ from each other are efficiently.	 discussed below. What is true for the nation is more (i) Nationality of buyers and sellers: or	less	true	for	firms.	Firms	too	engage	 Nationality of the key participants (i.e., in international business to import buyers and sellers) to the business what is available at lower prices in deals differs between domestic and other countries, and export goods to international businesses. In the case other countries where they can fetch of domestic business, both the buyers better prices for their products. Besides and sellers are from the same country. price considerations, there are several This makes it easier for both the parties other	benefits	which	nations	and	firms	 to understand each other and enter derive from international business. In into business deals. But this is not the a	way,	these	other	benefits	too	provide	 case with international business where an	 impetus	 to	 nations	 and	 firms	 to	 buyers and sellers come from different engage in international business. We countries. Because of differences shall turn our attention to some of in their languages, attitudes, social these	benefits	accruing	to	nations	and	 customs and business goals and 2024-25 Chapter 11.indd   250 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 251 practices, it becomes relatively more and aspirations of the stakeholders difficult for them to interact with belonging to different nations. one another and finalise business (iii) Mobility of factors of production: transactions. The degree of mobility of factors (ii) Nationality of other stakeholders: like labour and capital is generally Domestic and international businesses less between countries than within also differ in respect of the nationalities a country. While these factors of of the other stakeholders such as movement can move freely within employees, suppliers, shareholders/ the country, there exist various partners and  general public who restrictions to their movement across interact	 with	 business	 firms.	While	 nations. Apart from legal restrictions, in the case of domestic business all even the variations in socio-cultural such factors belong to one country, environments,	 geographic	 influences and therefore relatively speaking and economic conditions come in a depict more consistency in their value big way in their movement across systems and behaviours; decision countries. This is especially true of making in international business the	 labour	which	finds	 it	 difficult	 to becomes much more complex as the adjust to the climatic, economic and concerned business firms have to socio-cultural conditions that differ take into account a wider set of values from country to country. Box B Firms need to be Cognisant of Environmental Differences It is to be kept in mind that conducting and managing international business is not an	easy	venture.	It	is	more	difficult	to	manage	international	business	operations due to variations in the political, social, cultural and economic environments that differ from country to country. Simply	being	aware	of	these	differences	is	not	sufficient.	One	also	needs	to be sensitive and responsive to these changes by way of introducing adaptations in their marketing programmes and business strategies. It is, for instance, a well known fact that because of poor lower per capita income, consumers in most of the developing African and Asian countries are price sensitive and prefer to buy less expensive products. But consumers in the developed countries like Japan, United States, Canada, France, Germany and Switzerland have a marked preference for high quality and high priced products due to their better ability to pay. Business prudence,	 therefore,	 demands	 that	 the	 firms	 interested	 in	marketing	 to	 these countries are aware of such differences among the countries, and design their strategies	accordingly.	It	will	be	in	the	fitness	of	things	if	the	firms	interested	in exporting to these countries produce less expensive products for the consumers in the African and Asian regions, and design and develop high quality products for consumers in Japan and most of the European and North American countries. 2024-25 Chapter 11.indd   251 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM 252 BUSINESS  STUDIES (iv) Customer heterogeneity across Countries differ from one another markets: Since buyers in international in terms of their socio-economic markets hail from different countries, development, availability, cost and they differ in their socio-cultural efficiency	 of	 economic	 infrastructure background. Differences in their and market support services, and tastes, fashions, languages, beliefs business customs and practices due and customs, attitudes and product to their socio-economic milieu and preferences cause variations in historical coincidences. All such not only their demand for different differences make it necessary for products and services, but also in firms interested in entering into variations in their communication international markets to adapt patterns and purchase behaviours. their production, finance, human It is precisely because of the socio- resource and marketing plans as cultural differences that while people per the conditions prevailing in the in China prefer bicycles, the Japanese international markets. in contrast like to ride bikes.  Similarly, (vi) Political system and risks: while people in India use right-hand Political factors such as the type of driven	cars,	Americans	drive	cars	fitted	 government, political party system, with steering, brakes, etc., on the left political ideology, political risks, etc., side. Moreover, while people in the have a profound impact on business United States change their TV, bike operations. Since a business person is and other consumer durables very familiar with the political environment frequently — within two to three years of his/her country, he/she can well of their purchase, Indians mostly do understand it and predict its impact not go in for such replacements until on business operations. But this is not the products currently with them have the case with international business. totally worn out. Political environment differs from Such variations greatly complicate one country to another. One needs the task of designing products and to make special efforts to understand evolving strategies appropriate for the differing political environments customers in different countries. and their business implications. Though to some extent customers Since political environment keeps within a country too differ in their on changing, one needs to monitor tastes and preferences.  These political changes on an ongoing differences become more striking when basis in the concerned countries and we compare customers across nations. devise strategies to deal with diverse (v) Differences in business systems political risks. and practices: The differences in A major problem with a foreign business systems and practices are country’s political environment is a considerably much more among tendency among nations to favour countries than within a country. products and services originating in 2024-25 Chapter 11.indd   252 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 253 their own countries to those coming international trade. It includes not only from other countries. While this is not international trade (i.e., export and a	problem	for	business	firms	operating	 import of goods and services), but also domestically, it quite often becomes a a wide variety of other ways in which severe	problem	for	the	firms	interested	 the firms operate internationally. in exporting their goods and services to Major forms of business operations other nations or setting up their plants that constitute international business in the overseas markets. are as follows. (vii) Business regulations and (i) Merchandise exports and imports: policies: Coupled with its socio- Merchandise means goods that are economic environment and political tangible, i.e., those that can be seen philosophy, each country evolves and touched. When viewed from its own set of business laws and this perceptive, it is clear that while regulations. Though these laws, merchandise exports means sending regulations and economic policies are tangible goods abroad, merchandise more or less uniformly applicable within imports means bringing tangible a country, they differ widely among goods from a foreign country to one’s nations. Tariff and taxation policies, own country. Merchandise exports import quota system, subsidies and and imports, also known as trade in other controls adopted by a nation goods, include only tangible goods and are not the same as in other countries exclude trade in services. and often discriminate against foreign (ii) Service exports and imports: products, services and capital. Service exports and imports involve (viii) Currency used in business trade in intangibles. It is because transactions: Another important of the intangible aspect of services difference between domestic and that trade in services is also known international business is that the latter as invisible trade. A wide variety of involves the use of different currencies. services are traded internationally Since the exchange rate, i.e., the and these include: tourism and price of one currency expressed in travel, boarding and lodging (hotel relation to that of another country’s and restaurants), entertainment currency, keeps on fluctuating, it and recreation, transportation, adds to the problems of international professional services (such as training, business	firms	in	fixing	prices	of	their 	 recruitment, consultancy and research), products and hedging against foreign communication (postal, telephone, exchange risks. fax, courier and other audio-visual 11.1.4 Scope of International services), construction and engineering, Business marketing (e.g., wholesaling, retailing, advertising, marketing research As pointed out earlier, international and warehousing), educational and business is much broader than financial	 services	 (such	 as	 banking 2024-25 Chapter 11.indd   253 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM 254 BUSINESS  STUDIES Table 11.1    Major Difference between Domestic and International Business Basis Domestic business International business 1. Nationality of People or organisations Peop le  o r  o rgan isa t ions  o f buyers and f r o m  o n e  n a t i o n different countries participate sellers participate in domestic i n  i n t e r n a t i o n a l  b u s i n e s s business transactions. transactions. 2. Nationality Various other stake- Various other stakeholders such as of other   holders such as suppliers, suppliers, employees, middlemen, stakeholders employees, middlemen, shareholders and partners are from shareholders and partners different nations. are usually citizens of the same country. 3. Mobility of The degree of mobility The degree of mobility of factors of factors of  of factors of production production like labour and capital production like labour and capital is across nations is relatively less. relatively more within a country. 4. Customer   Domestic markets International markets lack heterogeneity are relatively more homogeneity due to differences in across markets homogeneous in nature. language, preferences, customs, etc., across markets. 5. Differences  Business systems and Business systems and practices in business practices are relatively vary considerably across countries. systems and  more homogeneous within practices a country. 6. Political  Domestic business is Different countries have different system and subject to political system forms of political systems and risks and risks of one single different degrees of risks which often country. become a barrier to international business. 7. Business  Domestic business is International business transactions regulations subject to rules, laws and are subject to rules, laws and and policies policies, taxation system, policies, tariffs and quotas, etc. of etc., of a single country. multiple countries. 8. Currency used Currency of domestic International business transactions in business  country is used. involve use of currencies of more transactions than one country. 2024-25 Chapter 11.indd   254 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 255 and insurance). Of these, tourism, (iv) Foreign investments: Foreign transportation and business services investment is another important form are major constituents of world trade of international business. Foreign in services (see Box C). investment involves investments (iii) Licensing and franchising: of funds abroad in exchange for Permitting another party in a foreign financial	 return.	 Foreign	 investment country to produce and sell goods can be of two types: direct and portfolio under your trademarks, patents or copy investments. rights in lieu of some fee is another way Direct investment takes place of entering into international business. when a company directly invests It is under the licensing system that in properties such as plant and Pepsi and Coca Cola are produced and machinery in foreign countries with a sold all over the world by local bottlers view to undertaking production and in foreign countries. Franchising is marketing of goods and services in similar to licensing, but it is a term those countries. Direct investment used in connection with the provision provides the investor a controlling of services. McDonalds, for instance, interest in a foreign company, known operates fast food restaurants the as Direct Investment, i.e., FDI. It can world over through its franchising be in the form of joint venture on PPP. system. A company, if it so desires, can also set Box C Tourism, Transportation and Business Services dominate International Trade in Services Tourism and transportation have emerged as major components of international trade in services. Most of the airlines, shipping companies, travel agencies and hotels get their major share of revenues from their overseas customers and operations abroad. Several countries have come to heavily depend on services as an important source of foreign exchange earnings and employment. India, for example, earns a sizeable amount of foreign exchange from exports of services related to travel and tourism. Business services: When one country provides services to other country and in the process earns foreign exchange, this is also treated as a form of international business activity. Fee received for services like banking, insurance, rentals, engineering and management services form part of country’s foreign exchange earnings. Undertaking of construction projects in foreign countries is also an example of export of business services. The other examples of such services  include overseas management contracts where arrangements are made by one company of a country which provides personnel to perform general or specialised management functions for another company in a foreign country in lieu of the other country. 2024-25 Chapter 11.indd   255 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM 256 BUSINESS  STUDIES up a wholly owned subsidiary abroad capital goods, technology, petroleum by making 100 per cent investment in products and fertilisers, pharmaforeign ventures, and thus acquiring ceutical products and a host of other full control over subsidiary’s operations consumer products which otherwise in the foreign market. might not be available domestically. A portfolio investment, on the other (ii) More efficient use of resources: hand, is an investment that a company As stated earlier, international business makes into another company by the operates on a simple principle — way of acquiring shares or providing produce what your country can loans to the latter, and earns income by produce	more	efficiently,	and	trade	the way of dividends or interest on loans. surplus production so generated with Unlike foreign direct investments, the other countries to procure what they investor under portfolio investment can	 produce	more	 efficiently.	When does not get directly involved into countries trade on this principle, they production and marketing operations. end up producing much more than It simply earns an income by investing what they can when each of them in shares, bonds, bills, or notes in a attempts to produce all the goods foreign country or providing loans to and services on its own. If such an foreign	business	firms. enhanced pool of goods and services is distributed equitably amongst nations, 11.1.5 Benefits of International it	benefits	all	the	trading	nations. Business (iii) Improving growth prospects and Notwithstanding greater complexities employment potentials: Producing and risks, international business is solely for the purposes of domestic important to both nations and business consumption severely restricts firms.	 It	 offers	 them	several	benefits.	 a country’s prospects for growth Growing	 realisation	 of	 these	benefits	 and employment. Many countries, over time has in fact been a contributory especially the developing ones, could factor to the expansion of trade and not execute their plans to produce on a larger scale, and thus create investment amongst nations, resulting employment for people because their in the phenomenon of globalisation. domestic market was not large enough Some	of	the	benefits	of	 international	 to absorb all that extra production. business to the nations and business Later on a few countries such as firms	are	discussed	below. Singapore, South Korea and China Benefits to Countries which saw markets for their products in the foreign countries embarked upon (i) Earning of foreign exchange: the	strategy	‘export	and	flourish’,	and International business helps a country soon became the star performers on the to earn foreign exchange which it can world map. This helped them not only later use for meeting its imports of in improving their growth prospects, 2024-25 Chapter 11.indd   256 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 257 but also created opportunities for improve prospects of their growth by employment of people living in these plunging into overseas markets. This is countries. precisely what has prompted many of (iv) Increased standard of living: the multinationals from the developed In the absence of international trade countries to enter into markets of of goods and services, it would not developing countries. While demand have been possible for the world in their home countries has got almost community to consume goods and saturated, they realised their products services produced in other countries were in demand in the developing that the people in these countries are countries and demand was picking able to consume and enjoy a higher up quite fast. standard of living. (iv) Way   out   to   intense competition in domestic market: Benefits to Firms W h e n  c o m p e t i t i o n  i n  t h e (i) Prospects for higher profits: domestic market is very intense, International business can be more internationalisation seems to be profitable	than	the	domestic	business.	 the	 only	 way	 to	 achieve	 significant When the domestic prices are lower, growth. Highly competitive domestic business	firms	can	earn	more	profits	 market drives many companies to go by selling their products in countries international in search of markets for where prices are high. their products. International business (ii) Increased capacity utilisation: thus acts as a catalyst of growth for Many f i rms setup product ion firms	facing	tough	market	conditions capacities for their products which on the domestic turf. are in excess of demand in the (v) Improved business vision: The domestic market. By planning overseas growth of international business of expansion and procuring orders from many companies is essentially a part foreign customers, they can think of of their business policies or strategic management. The vision to become making use of their surplus production international comes from the urge capacities and also improving the to grow, the need to become more profitability of their operations. competitive, the need to diversify Production on a larger scale often leads and to gain strategic advantages of to economies of scale, which in turn internationalisation. lowers production cost and improves per	unit	profit	margin. (iii) Prospects for growth: 11.2 Modes of entry Into Business firms	 find	 it	 quite	 frustrating	when	 InternatIonal BusIness demand for their products starts Simply speaking, the term mode getting saturated in the domestic means the manner or way. The phrase market.	Such	firms	can	considerably	 ‘modes of entry into international 2024-25 Chapter 11.indd   257 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM 258 BUSINESS  STUDIES business’, therefore, means various of overseas customers located in the ways in which a company can enter home country or wholesale importers into international business. While in the case of import operations. Such discussing the meaning and scope firms	do	not	directly	deal	with	overseas of international business, we have customers in the case of exports and already familiarised you with some of suppliers in the case of imports. the modes of entry into international business. In the following sections, Advantages we shall discuss in detail important Major advantages of exporting include: ways of entering into international 	 •	 As	 compared	 to	 other	modes	 of business along with their advantages entry, exporting/importing is the and limitations. Such a discussion easiest way of gaining entry into will enable you to know as to which international markets. It is less mode is more suitable under what complex an activity than setting conditions. up and managing joint-ventures or wholly owned subsidiaries 11.2.1 Exporting and Importing abroad. Exporting refers to sending of goods 	 •	 Exporting/importing	 is	 less and services from the home country involving in the sense that to a foreign country. In a similar business	firms	are	not	 required vein, importing is purchase of foreign to invest that much time and products and bringing them into money as is needed when they one’s home country. There are two desire to enter into joint ventures important	ways	 in	which	a	firm	can	 or set up manufacturing plants export or import products: direct and and facilities in host countries. indirect exporting/importing. In the 	 •	 Since	 exporting/importing	 does case of direct exporting/importing, not require much of investment a	firm	itself	approaches	the	overseas	 in foreign countries, exposure to buyers/suppliers and looks after all foreign investment risks is nil or the formalities related to exporting/ much lower than that is present importing activities including those when	firms	opt	for	other	modes	of related	to	shipment	and	financing	of	 entry into international business. goods and services. Indirect exporting/ Limitations importing, on the other hand, is one where the firm’s participation in Major limitations of exporting/ the export/import operations is importing as an entry mode of minimum, and most of the tasks international business are as follows: relating to export/import of the goods 	 •	 Since	the	goods	physically	move are carried out by some middle men from one country to another, such	as	export	houses	or	buying	offices	 exporting/importing involves 2024-25 Chapter 11.indd   258 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 259 additional packaging, trans- Despite the above mentioned portation and insurance costs. limitations, exporting/importing is Especially in the case of heavy the most preferred way for business items, transportation costs alone firms	when	 they	 are	 getting	 initially become an inhibiting factor to their involved with international business. exports and imports. On reaching As usually is the case, firms start the shores of foreign countries, their overseas operations with exports such products are subject to and imports, and later having gained custom duty and a variety of familiarity with the foreign market other levies and charges. Taken operations switch over to other forms together, all these expenses and of international business operations. payments substantially increase product costs and make them less 11.2.2 Contract Manufacturing competitive. •	 Exporting	is	not	a	feasible	option	 Contract manufacturing refers to a when import restrictions exist type of international business where in a foreign country. In such a a	firm	enters	into	a	contract	with	one situation,	firms	have	no	alternative	 or a few local manufacturers in foreign but to opt for other entry modes countries to get certain components or such as licensing/franchising goods	produced	as	per	its	specifications. or joint venture which makes Contract manufacturing, also known it feasible to make the product as outsourcing, can take three major available by way of producing forms: and marketing it locally in foreign 	 •	 Production	of	certain	components countries. such as automobile components •	 Export	 firms	 basically	 operate	 or shoe uppers to be used later for from their home country. They producing	final	products	such	as produce in the home country and cars and shoes; then ship the goods to foreign 	 •	 Assembly	of	components	into	final countries. Except a few visits products such as assembly of made by the executives of export hard	disk,	mother	board,	floppy firms to foreign countries to disk drive and modem chip into promote their products, the export computers; and firms	in	general	do	not	have	much	 	 •	 Complete	 manufacture	 of	 the contact with the foreign markets. products such as garments. This puts the export firms in The goods are produced or assembled a disadvan-tageous position vis- by the local manufacturers as per the à-vis	 the	 local	 firms	which	 are	 technology and management guidance very near the customers and are provided to them by the foreign able to better understand and company. The goods so manufactured serve them. or assembled by the local producers 2024-25 Chapter 11.indd   259 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM 260 BUSINESS  STUDIES are delivered to the international any idle production capacities, firm	 for	 use	 in	 its	 final	 products	 or	 manufacturing jobs obtained on out	rightly	sold	as	finished	products	 contract basis in a way provide a by	 the	 international	 firm	 under	 its	 ready market for their products brand names in various countries and ensure greater utilisation of including the home, host and other their production capacities. This is countries. All the major international how	the	Godrej	group	is	benefitting companies such as Nike, Reebok, from contract manufacturing Levis and Wrangler today get their in India. It is manufacturing products or components produced soaps under contract for many in the developing countries under multinationals including Dettol contract manufacturing. soap for Reckitt and Colman. This has considerably helped it Advantages in making use of its excess soap Contract manufacturing offers several manufacturing capacity. advantages to both the international 	 •	 The local manufacturer also gets company and local producers in the the opportunity to get involved foreign countries. with international business and •	 Contract	manufacturing	permits	 avail incentives, if any, available the	international	firms	to	get	the	 to	 the	 export	 firms	 in	 case	 the goods produced on a large scale international	firm	desires	goods	so without requiring investment in produced  be delivered to its home setting up production facilities. country or to some other foreign These firms make use of the countries. production facilities already existing in the foreign countries. Limitations •	 Since	there	is	no	or	little	investment	 The major disadvantages of contract in the foreign countries, there manufacturing	 to	 international	 firm is hardly any investment risk and local producer in foreign countries involved in the foreign countries. are as follows: •	 Contract manufacturing also gives 	 •	 Local	firms	might	not	adhere	 to an advantage to the international production design and quality company of getting products standards, thus causing serious manufactured or assembled at product quality problems to the lower costs especially if the local international	firm. producers happen to be situated 	 •	 Local	manufacturer	in	the	foreign in countries which have lower country loses his control over the material and labour costs. manufacturing process because •	 Local producers in foreign goods are produced strictly as per countries also gain from contract the	terms	and	specifications	of	the manufacturing. If they have contract. 2024-25 Chapter 11.indd   260 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 261 •	 The	 local	 firm	producing	under	 licensing. Franchisers usually set contract manufacturing is not strict rules and regulations as to how free to sell the contracted output the franchisees should operate while as per its will. It has to sell running their business.  Barring these the goods to the international two differences, franchising is pretty company at predetermined prices. much the same as licensing.  Like in This	 results	 in	 lower	 profits	 for	 the case of licensing, a franchising the	local	firm	if	the	open	market	 agreement too involves grant of rights prices for such goods happen to by one party to another for use of be higher than the prices agreed technology, trademark and patents upon under the contract. in return of the agreed payment for a certain period of time. The parent 11.2.3 Licensing and Franchising company is called the franchiser and Licensing is a contractual arrangement the other party to the agreement is in which	one	firm	grants	access	to	its	 called franchisee. The franchiser patents, trade secrets or technology to can be any service provider be it a another	firm	in	a	foreign	country	for	a	 restaurant, hotel, travel agency, bank fee	called	royalty.	The	firm	that	grants	 wholesaler or even a retailer - who such	permission	to	 the	other	firm	is	 has developed a unique technique for known as licensor and	the	other	firm	in	 creating and marketing of services the foreign country that acquires such under its own name and trade mark. It rights to use technology or patents is is the uniqueness of the technique that called the licensee. It may be mentioned gives the franchiser an edge over its here that it is not only technology that competitors	in	the	field,	and	makes	the is licensed. In the fashion industry, a would-be-service providers interested number of designers license the use in joining the franchising system. of their names. In some cases, there McDonald, Pizza Hut and Wal-Mart is exchange of technology between the are examples of some of the leading two	firms.	Sometimes	there	is	mutual	 franchisers operating worldwide. exchange of knowledge, technology and/or patents between the firms Advantages which is known as cross-licensing. As compared to joint ventures and Franchising is a term very similar wholly owned subsidiaries, licensing/ to licensing. One major distinction franchising is relatively a much easier between the two is that while the mode of entering into foreign markets former is used in connection with with proven product/technology production and marketing of goods, without much business risks and the term franchising applies to service investments. Some of the specific business. The other point of difference advantages of licensing are as follows: between the two is that franchising 	 •	 Under	 the	 licensing/franchising is relatively more stringent than system, it is the l icensor/ 2024-25 Chapter 11.indd   261 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM 262 BUSINESS  STUDIES franchiser who sets up the and brand names in foreign business unit and invests his/her countries.	As	a	result,	other	firms own money in the business. As in the foreign market cannot such, the licensor/franchiser has make use of such trademarks and to virtually make no investments patents. abroad. Licensing/franchising is, therefore, considered a less Limitations expensive mode of entering into international business. Licensing/franchising as a mode of •	 Since	 no	 or	 very	 little	 foreign	 international business suffers from the investment is involved, licensor/ following weaknesses. franchiser is not a party to the 	 •	 When	 a	 licensee/franchisee losses, if any, that occur to foreign becomes skilled in the manubusiness. Licensor/franchiser is facture and marketing of the paid by the licensee/franchisee by licensed/franchised products, way	of	 fees	fixed	 in	advance	as	a	 there is a danger that the licensee percentage of production or sales can start marketing an identical turnover. This royalty or fee keeps product under a slightly different accruing to the licensor/franchiser brand name. This can cause so long as the production and severe competition to the licenser/ sales keep on taking place in the franchiser. licensee’s/franchisee’s business 	 •	 If	not	maintained	properly,	trade unit. secrets can get divulged to others •	 Since	the	business	in	the	foreign	 in the foreign markets. Such country is managed by the lapses on the part of the licensee/ licensee/franchisee who is a local franchisee can cause severe person, there are lower risks of losses to the licensor/franchiser. business takeovers or government 	 •	 Over	time,	conflicts	often	develop interventions. between the licensor/franchiser •	 Licensee/franchisee	 being	 a	 and licensee/franchisee over local person has greater market issues such as maintenance of k n o w l e d g e  a n d  c o n t a c t s accounts, payment of royalty and which can prove quite helpful non-adherence to norms relating to the licensor/franchiser in to production of quality products. successfully conducting its These differences often result in marketing operations. costly litigations, causing harm to •	 As	per	the	terms	of	the	licensing/ franchising agreement, only the both the parties. parties to the licensing/franchising agreement are legally entitled 11.2.4 Joint Ventures to make use of the licensor’s/ Joint venture is a very common franchiser’s copyrights, patents strategy for entering into foreign 2024-25 Chapter 11.indd   262 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 263 markets.  A joint venture means local partner under joint venture establishing a firm that is jointly agreements. owned by two or more otherwise independent	firms.	In	the	widest	sense	 Limitations of the term, it can also be described Major limitations of a joint venture are as any form of association which discussed below: implies collaboration for more than a transitory period. A joint ownership 	 •	 Foreign	firms	entering	into	joint venture may be brought about in three ventures share the technology major ways: and trade secrets with local (i) Foreign investor buying an firms	 in	 foreign	 countries,	 thus interest in a local company always running the risks of such (ii)	 Local	 firm	acquiring	an	 interest	 a technology and secrets being in	an	existing	foreign	firm	 disclosed to others. (iii) Both the foreign and local 	 •	 The	dual	ownership	arrangement entrepreneurs jointly forming a may	 lead	 to	 conflicts,	 resulting new enterprise. in battle for control between the investing	firms. Advantages 11.2.5  Wholly Owned Subsidiaries Major advantages of joint venture include: This entry mode of international •	 Since	 the	 local	 partner	 also	 business is preferred by companies contributes to the equity capital of which want to exercise full control over such a venture, the international their overseas operations. The parent firm finds it financially less company acquires full control over the burdensome to expand globally.  foreign company by making 100 per •	 Joint	ventures	make	it	possible	to	 cent investment in its equity capital. execute large projects requiring A wholly owned subsidiary in a foreign huge  cap i ta l  out lays  and market can be established in either of manpower. the two ways: •	 The	foreign	business	firm	benefits	 	 (i)	 Setting	up	a	new	firm	altogether from a local partner’s knowledge to start operations in a foreign of the host countries regarding the country — also referred to as a competitive conditions, culture, green	field	venture,	or language, political systems and business systems. 	 (ii)	 Acquiring	an	established	firm	in •	 In	many	 cases	 entering	 into	 a	 the foreign country and using foreign market is very costly and that	firm	to	manufacture	and/or risky. This can be avoided by promote its products in the host sharing costs and/or risks with a nation. 2024-25 Chapter 11.indd   263 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM 264 BUSINESS  STUDIES Advantages 11.3 export-IMport procedures Major advantages of a wholly owned and docuMentatIon subsidiary in a foreign country are as A major distinction between domestic follows: and international operations is the •	 The	parent	firm	is	able	to	exercise	 complexity of the latter. Export and import of goods is not that straight full control over its operations in forward as buying and selling in the foreign countries. domestic market. Since foreign trade •	 Since	 the	 parent	 company	 on	 transactions involves movement its own looks after the entire of goods across frontiers and use operations of foreign subsidiary, of foreign exchange, a number of it is not required to disclose its formalities are needed to be performed technology or trade secrets to before the goods leave the boundaries others. of a country and enter into that of another. Following sections are devoted Limitations to a discussion of major steps that The limitations of setting up a wholly need to be undertaken for completing owned subsidiary abroad include:   export and import transactions. •	 The	parent	company	has	to	make	 11.3.1 Export Procedure 100 per cent equity investments in the foreign subsidiaries. This The number of steps and the sequence form of international business is, in which these are taken vary from one export transaction to another. Steps therefore, not suitable for small involved in a typical export transaction and	medium	size	firms	which	do	 are as follows. not have enough funds with them (i) Receipt of enquiry and sending to invest abroad. quotations: The prospective buyer •	 Since	the	parent	company	owns	 of a product sends an enquiry to 100 per cent equity in the foreign different exporters requesting them company, it alone has to bear the to send information regarding price, entire losses resulting from failure quality and terms and conditions of its foreign operations. for export of goods. Exporters can •	 Some	 countries	 are	 averse	 to	 be informed of such an enquiry even setting up of 100 per cent wholly by way of advertisement in the press owned subsidiaries by foreigners put in by the importer. The exporter in their countries. This form of sends a reply to the enquiry in the international business operations, form of a quotation —referred to as therefore, becomes subject to proforma invoice. The proforma invoice higher political risks.  contains information about the price at 2024-25 Chapter 11.indd   264 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 265 which the exporter is ready to sell the export licence before it proceeds with goods and also provides information exports. Important pre-requisites for about the quality, grade, size, weight, getting an export licence are as follows: mode of delivery, type of packing and 	 •	 Opening	a	bank	account	 in	any