CHAPTER FOURTEEN WAVES 14.1 INTRODUCTION In the previous Chapter, we studied the motion of objects oscillating in isolation. What happens in a system, which is a collection of such objects? A material medium provides 14.1 Introduction such an example. Here, elastic forces bind the constituents 14.2 Transverse and to each other and, therefore, the motion of one affects that of longitudinal waves the other. If you drop a little pebble in a pond of still water, 14.3 Displacement relation in a the water surface gets disturbed. The disturbance does not progressive wave remain confined to one place, but propagates outward along 14.4 The speed of a travelling a circle. If you continue dropping pebbles in the pond, you wave see circles rapidly moving outward from the point where the 14.5 The principle of water surface is disturbed. It gives a feeling as if the water is superposition of waves moving outward from the point of disturbance. If you put 14.6 Reflection of waves some cork pieces on the disturbed surface, it is seen that 14.7 Beats the cork pieces move up and down but do not move away Summary from the centre of disturbance. This shows that the water Points to ponder mass does not flow outward with the circles, but rather a Exercises moving disturbance is created. Similarly, when we speak, the sound moves outward from us, without any flow of air from one part of the medium to another. The disturbances produced in air are much less obvious and only our ears or a microphone can detect them. These patterns, which move without the actual physical transfer or flow of matter as a whole, are called waves. In this Chapter, we will study such waves. Waves transport energy and the pattern of disturbance has information that propagate from one point to another. All our communications essentially depend on transmission of signals through waves. Speech means production of sound waves in air and hearing amounts to their detection. Often, communication involves different kinds of waves. For example, sound waves may be first converted into an electric current signal which in turn may generate an electromagnetic wave that may be transmitted by an optical cable or via a 2024-25 WAVES 279 satellite. Detection of the original signal will usu- We shall illustrate this connection through ally involve these steps in reverse order. simple examples. Not all waves require a medium for their Consider a collection of springs connected to propagation. We know that light waves can one another as shown in Fig. 14.1. If the spring travel through vacuum. The light emitted by at one end is pulled suddenly and released, the stars, which are hundreds of light years away, disturbance travels to the other end. What has reaches us through inter-stellar space, which is practically a vacuum. The most familiar type of waves such as waves on a string, water waves, sound waves, seismic waves, etc. is the so-called mechanical waves. Fig. 14.1 A collection of springs connected to each These waves require a medium for propagation, other. The end A is pulled suddenly they cannot propagate through vacuum. They generating a disturbance, which then involve oscillations of constituent particles and propagates to the other end. depend on the elastic properties of the medium. The electromagnetic waves that you will learn happened? The first spring is disturbed from its in Class XII are a different type of wave. equilibrium length. Since the second spring is Electromagnetic waves do not necessarily require connected to the first, it is also stretched or a medium - they can travel through vacuum. compressed, and so on. The disturbance moves Light, radiowaves, X-rays, are all electromagnetic from one end to the other; but each spring only waves. In vacuum, all electromagnetic waves executes small oscillations about its equilibrium have the same speed c, whose value is : position. As a practical example of this situation, c = 299, 792, 458 ms–1 consider a stationary train at a railway station. . (14.1) Different bogies of the train are coupled to each A third kind of wave is the so-called Matter other through a spring coupling. When an waves. They are associated with constituents of engine is attached at one end, it gives a push to matter : electrons, protons, neutrons, atoms and the bogie next to it; this push is transmitted from molecules. They arise in quantum mechanical one bogie to another without the entire train description of nature that you will learn in your being bodily displaced. later studies. Though conceptually more abstract Now let us consider the propagation of sound than mechanical or electro-magnetic waves, they waves in air. As the wave passes through air, it have already found applications in several compresses or expands a small region of air. This devices basic to modern technology; matter causes a change in the density of that region, waves associated with electrons are employed say δρ, this change induces a change in pressure, in electron microscopes. δp, in that region. Pressure is force per unit area, In this chapter we will study mechanical so there is a restoring force proportional to waves, which require a material medium for the disturbance, just like in a spring. In this their propagation. case, the quantity similar to extension or The aesthetic influence of waves on art and compression of the spring is the change in literature is seen from very early times; yet the density. If a region is compressed, the molecules first scientific analysis of wave motion dates back in that region are packed together, and they tend to the seventeenth century. Some of the famous to move out to the adjoining region, thereby scientists associated with the physics of wave increasing the density or creating compression motion are Christiaan Huygens (1629-1695), in the adjoining region. Consequently, the air Robert Hooke and Isaac Newton. The in the first region undergoes rarefaction. If a understanding of physics of waves followed the region is comparatively rarefied the surrounding physics of oscillations of masses tied to springs air will rush in making the rarefaction move to and physics of the simple pendulum. Waves in the adjoining region. Thus, the compression or elastic media are intimately connected with rarefaction moves from one region to another, harmonic oscillations. (Stretched strings, coiled making the propagation of a disturbance springs, air, etc., are examples of elastic media). possible in air. 2024-25 280 PHYSICS In solids, similar arguments can be made. In a crystalline solid, atoms or group of atoms are arranged in a periodic lattice. In these, each atom or group of atoms is in equilibrium, due to forces from the surrounding atoms. Displacing one atom, keeping the others fixed, leads to restoring forces, exactly as in a spring. So we can think of atoms in a lattice as end points, with springs between pairs of them. In the subsequent sections of this chapter we are going to discuss various characteristic Fig. 14.3 A harmonic (sinusoidal) wave travelling properties of waves. along a stretched string is an example of a transverse wave. An element of the string 14.2 TRANSVERSE AND LONGITUDINAL in the region of the wave oscillates about WAVES its equilibrium position perpendicular to the direction of wave propagation. We have seen that motion of mechanical waves involves oscillations of constituents of the position as the pulse or wave passes through medium. If the constituents of the medium them. The oscillations are normal to the oscillate perpendicular to the direction of wave direction of wave motion along the string, so this propagation, we call the wave a transverse wave. is an example of transverse wave. If they oscillate along the direction of wave We can look at a wave in two ways. We can fix propagation, we call the wave a longitudinal an instant of time and picture the wave in space. wave. This will give us the shape of the wave as a Fig.14.2 shows the propagation of a single whole in space at a given instant. Another way pulse along a string, resulting from a single up is to fix a location i.e. fix our attention on a and down jerk. If the string is very long compared particular element of string and see its oscillatory motion in time. Fig. 14.4 describes the situation for longitudinal waves in the most familiar example of the propagation of sound waves. A long pipe filled with air has a piston at one end. A single sudden push forward and pull back of the piston will generate a pulse of condensations (higher density) and rarefactions (lower density) in the medium (air). If the  push-pull of the piston is continuous and periodic (sinusoidal), a Fig. 14.2 When a pulse travels along the length of a stretched string (x-direction), the elements of the string oscillate up and down (ydirection) to the size of the pulse, the pulse will damp out before it reaches the other end and reflection from that end may be ignored. Fig. 14.3 shows a similar situation, but this time the external agent gives a continuous periodic sinusoidal up Fig. 14.4 Longitudinal waves (sound) generated in a and down jerk to one end of the string. The pipe filled with air by moving the piston up resulting disturbance on the string is then a and down. A volume element of air oscillates sinusoidal wave. In either case the elements of in the direction parallel to the direction of the string oscillate about their equilibrium mean wave propagation. 2024-25 WAVES 281 sinusoidal wave will be generated propagating u Example 14.1  Given below are some in air along the length of the pipe. This is clearly examples of wave motion. State in each case an example of longitudinal waves. if the wave motion is transverse, longitudinal The waves considered above, transverse or or a combination of both: longitudinal, are travelling or progressive waves (a) Motion of a kink in a longitudinal spring since they travel from one part of the medium produced by displacing one end of the to another. The material medium as a whole spring sideways. does not move, as already noted. A stream, for (b) Waves produced in a cylinder example, constitutes motion of water as a whole. containing a liquid by moving its piston In a water wave, it is the disturbance that moves, back and forth. (c) Waves produced by a motorboat sailing not water as a whole. Likewise a wind (motion in water. of air as a whole) should not be confused with a (d) Ultrasonic waves in air produced by a sound wave which is a propagation of vibrating quartz crystal. disturbance (in pressure density) in air, without the motion of air medium as a whole. Answer In transverse waves, the particle motion is (a) Transverse and longitudinal normal to the direction of propagation of the (b) Longitudinal wave. Therefore, as the wave propagates, each (c) Transverse and longitudinal element of the medium undergoes a shearing (d) Longitudinal ⊳ strain. Transverse waves can, therefore, be propagated only in those media, which can 14.3 DISPLACEMENT RELATION IN A  PROGRESSIVE WAVE sustain shearing stress, such as solids and not in fluids. Fluids, as well as, solids can sustain For mathematical description of  a travelling compressive strain; therefore, longitudinal wave, we need a function of both position x and waves can be propagated in all elastic media. time t. Such a function at every instant should For example, in medium like steel, both give the shape of the wave at that instant. Also, transverse and longitudinal waves can at every given location, it should describe the propagate, while air can sustain only motion of the constituent of the medium at that location. If we wish to describe a sinusoidal longitudinal waves. The waves on the surface travelling wave (such as the one shown in Fig. of water are of two kinds: capillary waves and 14.3) the corresponding function must also be gravity waves. The former are ripples of fairly sinusoidal. For convenience, we shall take the short wavelength—not more than a few wave to be transverse so that if the position of centimetre—and the restoring force that the constituents of the medium is denoted by x, produces them is the surface tension of water. the displacement from the equilibrium position Gravity waves have wavelengths typically may be denoted by y. A sinusoidal travelling ranging from several metres to several hundred wave is then described by: meters. The restoring force that produces these y(x,t) = asin(kx − ωt + φ) (14.2) waves is the pull of gravity, which tends to keep the water surface at its lowest level. The The term φ in the argument of sine function oscillations of the particles in these waves are means equivalently that we are considering a not confined to the surface only, but extend with linear combination of sine and cosine functions: diminishing amplitude to the very bottom. The y(x ,t ) = A sin(kx − ωt ) + B cos(kx − ωt ) (14.3) particle motion in water waves involves a From Equations (14.2) and (14.3), complicated motion—they not only move up and down but also back and forth. The waves in an B a = A2 + B2  and  φ =  tan−1    ocean are the combination of both longitudinal A  and transverse waves. To understand why Equation (14.2) It is found that, generally, transverse and represents a sinusoidal travelling wave, take a longitudinal waves travel with different speed fixed instant,  say t = t . Then, the argument of 0 in the same medium. the sine function in Equation (14.2) is simply 2024-25 282 PHYSICS kx + constant. Thus, the shape of the wave (at any fixed instant) as a function of x  is a sine wave. Similarly, take a fixed location, say x = x . 0 Then, the argument of the sine function in Equation (14.2) is constant -ωt. The displacement y, at a fixed location, thus, varies sinusoidally with time. That is, the constituents of the medium at different positions execute simple harmonic motion. Finally, as t increases, x must increase in the positive direction to keep kx – ωt + φ  constant. Thus, Eq. (14.2) represents a sinusiodal (harmonic) wave travelling along the positive direction of the x-axis. On the other hand, a function y(x, t) = a sin(kx + ωt + φ)  (14.4) represents a wave travelling in the negative direction of x-axis. Fig. (14.5) gives the names of the various physical quantities appearing in Eq. (14.2) that we now interpret. y(x,t) : displacement as a function of position x and time t a : amplitude of a wave ω : angular frequency of the wave Fig. 14.6 A harmonic wave progressing along the k : angular wave number positive direction of x-axis at different times. kx–ωt+φ : initial phase angle (a+x = 0, t = 0) Using the plots of Fig. 14.6, we now define Fig. 14.5 The meaning of standard symbols in the various quantities of Eq. (14.2). Eq. (14.2) 14.3.1  Amplitude and Phase Fig. 14.6 shows the plots of Eq. (14.2) for In Eq. (14.2), since the sine function varies different values of time differing by equal between 1 and –1, the displacement y (x,t) varies intervals of time. In a wave, the crest is the between a and –a. We can take a to be a positive point of maximum positive displacement, the constant, without any loss of generality. Then, trough is the point of maximum negative a represents the maximum displacement of the displacement. To see how a wave travels, we constituents of the medium from their can fix attention on a crest and see how it equilibrium position. Note that the displacement progresses with time. In the figure, this is y may be positive or negative, but a is positive. shown by a cross (×) on the crest. In the same It is called the amplitude of the wave. manner, we can see the motion of a particular The quantity (kx – ωt + φ) appearing as the constituent of the medium at a fixed location, say at the origin of the x-axis. This is shown argument of the sine function in Eq. (14.2) is by a solid dot (•). The plots of Fig. 14.6 show called the phase of the wave. Given the that with time, the solid dot (•) at the origin amplitude a, the phase determines the moves periodically, i.e., the particle at the displacement of the wave at any position and origin oscillates about its mean position as at any instant. Clearly φ is the phase at x = 0 the wave progresses. This is true for any other and t = 0. Hence, φ is called the initial phase location also. We also see that during the time angle. By suitable choice of origin on the x-axis the solid dot (•) has completed one full and the intial time, it is possible to have φ = 0. oscillation, the crest has moved further by a Thus there is no loss of generality in dropping certain distance. φ, i.e., in taking Eq. (14.2) with φ = 0. 2024-25 WAVES 283 14.3.2  Wavelength and Angular Wave Number The minimum distance between two points having the same phase is called the wavelength of the wave, usually denoted by λ. For simplicity, we can choose points of the same phase to be crests or troughs. The wavelength is then the distance between two consecutive crests or troughs in a wave. Taking  φ = 0 in Eq. (14.2), Fig. 14.7 An element of a string at a fixed location the displacement at  t = 0 is given by oscillates in time with amplitude a and y(x, 0) = a sin kx      (14.5) period T, as the wave passes over it. Since the sine function repeats its value after Now, the period of oscillation of the wave is the every 2π change in angle, time it takes for an element to complete one full oscillation. That is −a sinωt = −a sinω(t + T) = −a sin(ωt + ωT) That is the displacements at points x and at Since sine function repeats after every 2π , 2n x + π 2π k ωT = 2π   or   ω = (14.7) T are the same, where n=1,2,3,... The 1east distance between points with the same ω  is called the angular frequency of the wave. displacement (at any given instant of time) is Its SI unit is rad s –1. The frequency ν is the obtained by taking n = 1. λ  is then given by number of oscillations per second. Therefore, λ = 2π 2π ν = 1 = ω T 2π  (14.8) or   k = λ     (14.6) k ν  is usually measured in hertz. k is the angular wave number or propagation In the discussion above, reference has always constant; its SI unit is radian per metre or been made to a wave travelling along a string or rad  m−1 * a transverse wave. In a longitudinal wave, the displacement of an element of the medium is 14.3.3 Period, Angular Frequency and parallel to the direction of propagation of the Frequency wave. In Eq. (14.2), the displacement function Fig. 14.7 shows again a sinusoidal plot. It for a longitudinal wave is written as, describes not the shape of the wave at a certain s(x, t) = a sin (kx – ωt + φ) (14.9) instant but the displacement of an element (at any fixed location) of the medium as a function where s(x, t ) is the displacement of an element of time. We may for, simplicity, take Eq. (14.2) of the medium in the direction of propagation with φ = 0 and monitor the motion of the element of the wave at position x and time t. In Eq. (14.9), say at x = 0 . We then get a is the displacement amplitude; other quantities have the same meaning as in case y(0,t ) = a sin(−ωt ) of a transverse wave except that the displacement function y (x, t ) is to be replaced = −a sinωt by the function s (x, t ). * Here again, ‘radian’ could be dropped and the units could be written merely as m–1. Thus, k represents 2π times the number of waves (or the total phase difference) that can be accommodated per unit length, with SI units m–1. 2024-25 284 PHYSICS the shape of the wave at two instants of time, u Example 14.2  A wave travelling along a which differ by a small time internal ∆t. The string is described by, entire wave pattern is seen to shift to the right y(x, t) = 0.005 sin (80.0 x – 3.0 t), (positive direction of x-axis) by a distance ∆x. In particular, the crest shown by a dot (• ) moves a in which the numerical constants are in SI units (0.005 m, 80.0 rad m–1, and 3.0 rad s–1). Calculate (a) the amplitude, (b) the wavelength, and (c) the period and frequency of the wave. Also, calculate the displacement y of the wave at a distance x = 30.0 cm and time t = 20 s ? Answer  On comparing this displacement equation with Eq. (14.2), Fig. 14.8 Progression of a harmonic wave from time y (x, t ) = a sin (kx –  ωt ), t  to t + ∆t. where ∆t is a small interval. The wave pattern as a whole shifts to the we find right. The crest of the wave (or a point with (a) the amplitude of the wave is 0.005 m = 5 mm. any fixed phase) moves right by the distance (b) the angular wave number k and angular ∆x in time ∆t. frequency ω are distance ∆x in time ∆t. The speed of the wave is k = 80.0  m–1 and ω = 3.0 s–1 then ∆x/∆t. We can put the dot (• ) on a point We, then, relate the wavelength λ to k through with any other phase. It will move with the same Eq. (14.6), speed v (otherwise the wave pattern will not λ = 2π/k remain fixed). The motion of a fixed phase point on the wave is given by 2π = 80.0 m−1 kx – ωt = constant (14.10) =  7.85 cm Thus, as time t changes, the position x of the fixed phase point must change so that the phase (c) Now, we relate T to ω by the relation remains constant. Thus, T = 2π/ω kx – ωt = k(x+∆x) – ω(t+∆t) 2π or k ∆x – ω ∆t =0 = −1 3.0 s Taking ∆x, ∆t vanishingly small, this gives = 2.09 s dx  ω and frequency, v  = 1/T = 0.48 Hz = = v (14.11) dt k The displacement y at x = 30.0 cm and Relating ω to T and k to λ, we get time t = 20 s is given by y  = (0.005 m) sin (80.0 × 0.3 – 3.0 × 20) = 2πν v = λν = λ 2π λ (14.12) / T = (0.005 m) sin (–36 + 12π) = (0.005 m) sin (1.699) Eq. (14.12), a general relation for all progressive = (0.005 m) sin (970) j 5 mm   ⊳ waves, shows that in the time required for one full oscillation by any constituent of the medium, the 14.4   THE SPEED OF A TRAVELLING WAVE wave pattern travels a distance equal to the To determine the speed of propagation of a wavelength of the wave. It should be noted that travelling wave, we can fix our attention on any the speed of a mechanical wave is determined by particular point on the wave (characterised by the inertial (linear mass density for strings, mass some value of the phase) and see how that point density in general) and elastic properties (Young’s moves in time. It is convenient to look at the modulus for linear media/ shear modulus, bulk motion of the crest of the wave. Fig. 14.8 gives modulus) of the medium. The medium determines 2024-25 WAVES 285 the speed; Eq. (14.12) then relates wavelength to arising due to an external force). It does not frequency for the given speed. Of course, as depend on wavelength or frequency of the wave remarked earlier, the medium can support both itself. In higher studies, you will come across transverse and longitudinal waves, which will have waves whose speed is not independent of different speeds in the same medium. Later in this frequency of the wave. Of the two parameters λ chapter, we shall obtain specific expressions for and ν the source of disturbance determines the the speed of mechanical waves in some media. frequency of the wave generated. Given the speed of the wave in the medium and the 14.4.1 Speed of a Transverse Wave on frequency Eq. (14.12) then fixes the wavelength Stretched String The speed of a mechanical wave is determined λ  = v ν (14.15) by the restoring force setup in the medium when it is disturbed and the inertial properties (mass density) of the medium. The speed is expected to u Example 14.3 A steel wire 0.72 m long be directly related to the former and inversely to has a mass of 5.0 ×10–3 kg. If the wire is the latter. For waves on a string, the restoring under a tension of 60 N, what is the speed force is provided by the tension T in the string. of transverse waves on the wire ? The inertial property will in this case be linear mass density µ, which is mass m  of the string Answer Mass per unit length of the wire, divided by its length L. Using Newton’s Laws of µ 5.0×10−3 kg Motion, an exact formula for the wave speed on = 0.72 m a string can be derived, but this derivation is outside the scope of this book. We shall, = 6.9 ×10–3 kg m–1 therefore, use dimensional analysis. We already know that dimensional analysis alone can never Tension, T = 60 N yield the exact formula. The overall The speed of wave on the wire is given by dimensionless constant is always left undetermined by dimensional analysis. T 60 N v = = = 93 m s−1 µ 6.9 ×10−3kg m−1   ⊳ The dimension of µ is [ML–1] and that of T is like force, namely [MLT–2]. We need to combine these dimensions to get the dimension of speed 14.4.2 Speed of a Longitudinal Wave v [LT–1]. Simple inspection shows that the (Speed of Sound) quantity T/µ has the relevant dimension In a longitudinal wave, the constituents of the medium oscillate forward and backward in the  −2 MLT  =  2 −2 L T  direction of propagation of the wave. We have [  ML ] already seen that the sound waves travel in the Thus if T and µ are assumed to be the only form of compressions and rarefactions of small relevant physical quantities, volume elements of air.  The elastic property that determines the stress under compressional T strain is the bulk modulus of the medium defined v  = C (14.13) by (see Chapter 8) µ where C is the undetermined constant of ∆P B = − dimensional analysis. In the exact formula, it ∆ (14.16) V/V turms out, C=1. The speed of transverse waves Here, the change in pressure ∆P produces a on a stretched string is given by ∆V volumetric strain . B has the same dimension V v  = T (14.14) as pressure and given in SI units in terms of µ pascal (Pa). The inertial property relevant for the Note the important point that the speed v propagation of wave is the mass density ρ, with depends only on the properties of the medium T dimensions [ML–3]. Simple inspection reveals and µ (T is a property of the stretched string that quantity B/ρ has the relevant dimension: 2024-25 286 PHYSICS  −2 −2    Liquids and solids generally have higher speed ML T  =  2 −2 L T  1  −3    ( 4.17) of sound than gases. [Note for solids, the speed ML  being referred to is the speed of longitudinal Thus, if B and ρ  are considered to be the only waves in the solid]. This happens because they relevant physical quantities, are much more difficult to compress than gases and so have much higher values of bulk modulus. B Now, see Eq. (14.19). Solids and liquids have v  = C (14.18) ρ higher mass densities ( ρ ) than gases. But the where, as before, C is the undetermined constant corresponding increase in both the modulus (B) from dimensional analysis. The exact derivation of solids and liquids is much higher. This is the shows that C=1. Thus, the general formula for reason why the sound waves travel faster in longitudinal waves in a medium is: solids and liquids. We can estimate the speed of sound in a gas v  = B (14.19) in the ideal gas approximation. For an ideal gas, ρ the pressure P, volume V and temperature T are For a linear medium, like a solid bar, the related by (see Chapter 10). lateral expansion of the bar is negligible and we PV = Nk T (14.21) B may consider it to be only under longitudinal strain. In that case, the relevant modulus of where N is the number of molecules in volume elasticity is Young’s modulus, which has the V, k  is the Boltzmann constant and T the B same dimension as the Bulk modulus. temperature of the gas (in Kelvin). Therefore, for an isothermal change it follows from Eq.(14.21) Dimensional analysis for this case is the same that as before and yields a relation like Eq. (14.18), V∆P + P∆V  = 0 with an undetermined C, which the exact derivation shows to be unity. Thus, the speed of or ∆P longitudinal waves in a solid bar is given by  − = P ∆V/V Hence, substituting in Eq. (14.16), we have v  = Y (14.20) ρ B = P Therefore, from Eq. (14.19) the speed of a where Y is the Young’s modulus of the material longitudinal wave in an ideal gas is given by, of the bar. Table 14.1 gives the speed of sound in some media. v  = P (14.22) Table 14.1 Speed of Sound in some Media ρ This relation was first given by Newton and is known as Newton’s formula. u Example 14.4  Estimate the speed of sound in air at standard temperature and pressure. The mass of 1 mole of air is 29.0 ×10–3 kg. Answer We know that 1 mole of any gas occupies 22.4 litres at STP. Therefore, density of air at STP is: ρ  = (mass of one mole of air)/ (volume of one o mole of air at STP) 29.0 ×10−3 kg = 22.4 ×10−3 m3 =  1.29 kg  m–3 2024-25 WAVES 287 According to Newton’s formula for the speed of sound in a medium, we get for the speed of sound in air at STP, = 280 m s–1   (14.23) ⊳ The result shown in Eq.(14.23) is about 15% smaller as compared to the experimental value of 331 m s–1 as given in Table 14.1. Where did we go wrong ? If we examine the basic assumption made by Newton that the pressure variations in a medium during propagation of sound are isothermal, we find that this is not correct. It was pointed out by Laplace that the pressure variations in the propagation of sound waves are so fast that there is little time for the heat flow to maintain constant temperature. These variations, therefore, are adiabatic and not isothermal. For adiabatic processes the ideal gas satisfies the relation (see Section 11.8), Fig. 14.9 Two pulses having equal and opposite displacements moving in opposite PV γ  = constant directions. The overlapping pulses add up i.e. ∆(PV γ )  = 0 to zero displacement in curve (c). or P γ V γ –1 ∆V + V γ ∆P = 0 pulses. Figure 14.9 shows the situation when where γ is the ratio of two specific heats, two pulses of equal and opposite shapes move C /C . p v towards each other. When the pulses overlap, Thus, for an ideal gas the adiabatic bulk modulus is given by, the resultant displacement is the algebraic sum of the displacement due to each pulse. This is B  = ∆P known as the principle of superposition of waves. ad − ∆V/V According to this principle, each pulse moves =  γP as if others are not present. The constituents of The speed of sound is, therefore, from Eq. the medium, therefore, suffer displacments due (14.19), given by, to both and since the displacements can be positive and negative, the net displacement is v = γ  P (14.24) an algebraic sum of the two. Fig. 14.9 gives ρ graphs of the wave shape at different times. Note the dramatic effect in the graph (c); the This modification of Newton’s formula is referred displacements due to the two pulses have exactly to as the Laplace correction. For air cancelled each other and there is zero γ = 7/5. Now using Eq. (14.24) to estimate the speed displacement throughout. of sound in air at STP, we get a value 331.3 m s–1,     To put the principle of superposition which agrees with the measured speed. mathematically, let y  (x,t) and y  (x,t) be the 1 2 displacements due to two wave disturbances in 14.5 THE PRINCIPLE OF SUPERPOSITION the medium. If the waves arrive in a region OF WAVES simultaneously, and therefore, overlap, the net displacement y (x,t) is given by What happens when two wave pulses travelling in opposite directions cross each other y (x, t) =  y (x, t ) +  y (x, t) (14.25) 1 2 (Fig. 14.9)? It turns out that wave pulses If we have two or more waves moving in the continue to retain their identities after they have medium the resultant waveform is the sum of crossed. However, during the time they overlap, wave functions of individual waves. That is, if the wave pattern is different from either of the the wave functions of the moving waves are 2024-25 288 PHYSICS y  = f (x–vt), 1 1 y  = f (x–vt), 2 2 .......... .......... y  = f  (x–vt) n n then the wave funct ion descr ib ing the disturbance in the medium is y = f (x – vt)+ f (x – vt)+  ...+ f (x – vt) 1 2 n n = ∑ f  (x − vt ) i (14.26) i=1 The principle of superposition is basic to the phenomenon of interference. For simplicity, consider two harmonic travelling waves on a stretched string, both with the same ω (angular frequency) and k (wave number), and, therefore, the same wavelength Fig. 14.10 The resultant of two harmonic waves of λ. Their wave speed will be identical. Let us equal amplitude and wavelength further assume that their amplitudes are equal according to the principle of superposition. and they are both travelling in the positive The amplitude of the resultant wave direction of x-axis. The waves only differ in their depends on the phase difference φ, which initial phase. According to Eq. (14.2), the two is zero  for (a) and π for (b) waves are described by the functions: φ between the constituent two waves: y (x, t) = a sin (kx – ωt) (14.27) 1 A(φ)  =  2a cos ½φ (14.32) For φ = 0, when the waves are in phase, and y (x, t) =  a sin (kx – ωt + φ ) (14.28) 2 y (x, t ) = 2a sin (kx −ωt ) (14.33) The net displacement is then, by the principle of superposition, given by i.e., the resultant wave has amplitude 2a, the largest possible value for A. For φ = π , the y  (x, t ) = a sin (kx – ωt) + a sin (kx – ωt + φ ) (14.29) waves are completely, out of phase and the resultant wave has zero displacement   (kx −ωt ) + (kx −ωt +φ ) φ  everywhere at all times = a 2sin   cos  y   (x, t )  = 0 (14.34)   2  2  Eq. (14.33) refers to the so-called constructive (14.30) interference of the two waves where the where we have used the familiar trignometric amplitudes add up in the resultant wave. Eq. identity for sin A+ sin B . We then have (14.34) is the case of destructive intereference where the amplitudes subtract out in the ( φ  φ y x, t ) = 2a cos sin  kx −ωt +  resultant wave. Fig. 14.10 shows these two cases  (14.31) 2  2  of interference of waves arising from the Eq. (14.31) is also a harmonic travelling wave in principle of superposition. the positive direction of x-axis, with the same 14.6 REFLECTION OF WAVES frequency and wavelength. However, its initial So far we considered waves propagating in an φ unbounded medium. What happens if a pulse phase angle is . The significant thing is that 2 or a wave meets a boundary? If the boundary is its amplitude is a function of the phase difference rigid, the pulse or wave gets reflected. The 2024-25 WAVES 289 phenomenon of echo is an example of reflection If on the other hand, the boundary point is by a rigid boundary. If the boundary is not not rigid but completely free to move (such as in completely rigid or is an interface between two the case of a string tied to a freely moving ring different elastic media, the situation is some on a rod), the reflected pulse has the same phase what complicated. A part of the incident wave is and amplitude (assuming no energy dissipation) reflected and a part is transmitted into the as the incident pulse. The net maximum second medium. If a wave is incident obliquely displacement at the boundary is then twice the on the boundary between two different media amplitude of each pulse. An example of non- rigid the transmitted wave is called the refracted boundary is the open end of an organ pipe. wave. The incident and refracted waves obey To summarise, a travelling wave or pulse Snell’s law of refraction, and the incident and suffers a phase change of π on reflection at a reflected waves obey the usual laws of rigid boundary and no phase change on reflection. reflection at an open boundary. To put this Fig. 14.11 shows a pulse travelling along a mathematically, let the incident travelling stretched string and being reflected by the wave be boundary. Assuming there is no absorption of energy by the boundary, the reflected wave has y2 (x, t ) = a sin (kx −ωt ) the same shape as the incident pulse but it At a rigid boundary, the reflected wave is given suffers a phase change of π or 1800 on reflection. by This is because the boundary is rigid and the y (x, t ) = a sin (kx – ωt + π ). r disturbance must have zero displacement at all    = – a sin (kx – ωt ) (14.35) times at the boundary. By the principle of At an open boundary, the reflected wave is given superposition, this is possible only if the reflected by and incident waves differ by a phase of π, so that y (x, t ) = a sin (kx – ωt + 0). r the resultant displacement is zero. This    = a sin (kx – ωt) (14.36) reasoning is based on boundary condition on a Clearly, at the rigid boundary, y = y2 + yr = 0 rigid wall. We can arrive at the same conclusion dynamically also. As the pulse arrives at the wall, at all times. it exerts a force on the wall. By Newton’s Third 14.6.1   Standing Waves and Normal Modes Law, the wall exerts an equal and opposite force We considered above reflection at one boundary.