5 RURAL DEVELOPMENT After studying this chapter, the learners will • understand rural development and the major issues associated with it • appreciate how crucial the development of rural areas is for India’s overall development • understand the critical role of credit and marketing systems in rural development • learn about the importance of diversification of productive activities to sustain livelihoods • understand the significance of organic farming in sustainable development. RURAL DEVELOPMENT 75 2024-25 “Only the tillers of the soil live by the right. The rest form their train and eat only the bread of dependence”. Thiruvalluvar 5.1 INTRODUCTION lagging behind in the overall development of the village economy. Previously we have studied how poverty Some of the areas which are was a major challenge facing India. We challenging and need fresh initiatives also know that the majority of the poor for development in rural India include live in rural areas where they do not • Development of human resources have access to the basic necessities including of life. – literacy, more specifically, female Agriculture is the major source of literacy, education and skill livelihood in the rural sector. Mahatma development Gandhi once said that the real progress – health, addressing both sanitation of India did not mean simply the growth and public health and expansion of industrial urban • Land reforms centres but mainly the development of • Development of the productive the villages. This idea of village resources of each locality development being at the centre of the • Infrastructure development like overall development of the nation is relevant even today. Why is this so? electricity, irrigation, credit, marketing, transport facilities Why should we attach such significance to rural development when we see including construction of village roads and feeder roads to nearby around us fast growing cities with large industries and modern information highways, facilities for agriculture research and extension, and technology hubs? It is because more than two-third of India’s population information dissemination • Special measures for alleviation depends on agriculture that is yet to become productive enough to provide of poverty and bringing about significant improvement in the living for them;  one-fourth of rural India still lives in abject poverty. That is the conditions of the weaker sections of the population emphasising reason why we have to see a developed rural India if our nation has to realise access to productive employment opportunities real progress. What, then, does rural development imply? All this means that people engaged in farm and non-farm activities in 5.2 WHAT IS RURAL DEVELOPMENT? rural areas have to be provided with various means that help them increase Rural development is a comprehensive the productivity. They also need to be term. It essentially focuses on action for given opportunities to diversify the development of areas that are into various non-farm productive 76 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 2024-25 activities such as food processing. reason for this. They also argue that Enabling them better and more inadequate infrastructure, lack of affordable access to healthcare, alternate employment opportunities in sanitation facilities at workplaces and the industry or service sector, homes and education for all would also increasing casualisation of employment need to be given top priority for rapid etc., further impede rural development. rural development. The impact of this phenomenon can be It was observed in an earlier chapter seen from the growing distress that although the share of agriculture witnessed among farmers across sector’s contribution to GDP was on a different parts of India. Against this decline, the population dependent on background, we will critically look at this sector did not show any significant some of the crucial aspects of rural change. Further, after the initiation of India like credit and marketing reforms, the growth rate of agriculture systems, agricultural diversification sector decelerated to about 3 per cent and the role of organic farming in per annum during the 1991-2012, promoting sustainable development. which was lower than the earlier years. In recent years, this sector has become 5.3 CREDIT AND MARKETING IN RURAL volatile. During 2014-15, the GVA AREAS growth rate of agriculture and its allied sectors was less than one per cent. Credit: Growth of rural economy Scholars identify decline in public depends primarily on infusion of investment since 1991 as the major capital, from time to time, to realise higher productivity in agriculture and non-agriculture sectors. As the time of Work These Out gestation period between crop sowing and realisation of income after production is Ø On a monthly basis, go through the quite long, farmers borrow  from various newspapers of your region and sources to meet their  initial investment identify the problems raised by on seeds, fertilisers, implements and them in relation to rural areas and other family expenses of marriage, the solutions offered.  You could also death, religious ceremonies etc. visit a nearby village and identify At the time of independence, the problems faced by people there. moneylenders and traders exploited Discuss this in the classroom. small and marginal farmers and Ø Prepare a list of recent schemes landless labourers by lending to them and their objectives from the on high interest rates and by government website https:// manipulating the accounts to keep www.rural.nic.in. Collect the details them in a debt-trap. A major change of how anyone of these schemes occurred after 1969 when India implemented in your region/rural neighbourhood areas. Discuss your adopted social banking and multiobservations in class. agency approach to adequately meet the needs of rural credit. Later,  the RURAL DEVELOPMENT 77 2024-25 Box 5.1: The Poor Women’s Bank ‘Kudumbashree’ is a women-oriented community-based poverty reduction programme being implemented in Kerala. In 1995, a thrift and credit society was started as a small savings bank for poor women with the objective to encourage savings. The thrift and credit society mobilised Rs 1 crore as thrift savings. These societies have been acclaimed as the largest informal banks in Asia in terms of participation and savings mobilised. Source:  www.kudumbashree.org. Visit this website and explore various other initiatives undertaken by this organisation. Identify some factors which contributed to their successes and discuss in the class. National Bank for Agriculture and rates. Recently, Self-Help Groups Rural Development (NABARD) was set (henceforth SHGs) have emerged to fill up in 1982 as an apex body to the gap in the formal credit system coordinate the activities of all because the formal credit delivery institutions involved in the rural mechanism has not only proven financing system. The Green inadequate but has  also not been fully Revolution was a harbinger of major integrated into the overall rural social changes in the credit system as it led to and community development. Since the diversification of the portfolio of some kind of collateral is required, vast rural credit towards production- proportion of poor rural households oriented lending. were automatically out of the credit The institutional structure of rural network. The SHGs promote thrift in banking today consists of a set of small proportions by a minimum multi-agency institutions, namely, contribution from each member. From commercial banks, regional rural banks the pooled money, credit is given to the (RRBs), cooperatives and land needy members to be repayable in development banks. They are expected small instalments at reasonable interest to dispense adequate credit at cheaper rates. By May 2019, nearly 6 crore Work These Out Ø In your locality/neighbourhood, you might notice self-help groups providing credit. Attend few meetings of such self-help groups. Write a report on the profile of a self-help group. The profile may include — when it was started, the number of members, amount of savings and type of credit they provide and how borrowers use the loan. Ø You might also find that those who take a loan for starting self-employment activities but use it for other purposes. Interact with few such borrowers. Identify the reasons for not starting self employment activities and discuss in the classroom. 78 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 2024-25 women in India have become member However, all is not well with our in 54 lakh women SHGs. About ` 10- banking system. 15,000 per SHG and another ̀ 2.5 lakhs With the possible exception of the per SHG as a Community Investment commercial banks, other formal Support Fund (CISF) are provided as part institutions have failed to develop a of renovating fund to take up self culture of deposit mobilisation — employement for income generation. lending to worthwhile borrowers and Such credit provisions are generally effective loan recovery. Agriculture loan referred to as micro-credit programmes. default rates have been chronically SHGs have helped in the empowerment high. Why farmers failed to pay back of women. It is alleged that the borrowings loans? It is alleged that farmers are are mainly confined to consumption deliberately refusing to pay back purposes. Why are borrowers not loans. What could be the reasons? spending for productive purposes? Thus, the expansion and promotion of the rural banking sector has taken a Rural Banking — a Critical Appraisal: backseat after reforms. To improve the Rapid expansion of the banking system situation, In recent years, all the adults had a positive effect on rural farm and are encouraged to open bank accounts non-farm output, income and as a part of a scheme known as Janemployment, especially after the green Dhan Yojana. Those bank account revolution — it helped farmers to avail holders can get Rs. 1-2 lakh accidental services and credit facilities and a insurance coverage and overdraft variety of loans for meeting their facilities for Rs. 10,000 and get their prodution needs. Famines became wages if they get any government-related events of the past; we have now jobs and works under MNREGA; achieved food security which is reflected old age pension and other social in the abundant buffer stocks of grains. security payments of  the government are Work These Out Ø In the last few years, you might have taken note — in your neighbourhood if you are living in rural areas or read in the newspapers or seen on TV — of farmers commiting suicides. Many such farmers had borrowed money for farming and other purposes. It was found that when they were unable to pay back due to crop failure, insufficient income and employment opportunities, they took such steps. Collect information relating to such cases and discuss in the classroom. Ø Visit banks that cater to rural areas. They may be primary agricultural cooperative banks, land development banks, regional rural banks or district cooperative banks. Collect details such as how many rural households borrowed from them,  amount generally borrowed, kinds of collateral used, interest rates and dues. Ø If farmers who borrowed from cooperative banks could not pay back due to crop failure and other reasons, their loans should be waived otherwise they may take drastic decisions like committing suicides. Do you agree? RURAL DEVELOPMENT 79 2024-25 transferred to bank accounts. There is no prices prevailing in markets were often need to keep minimum bank balance. forced to sell at low prices. They also did This has led to more than 50 crore people not have proper storage facilities to keep opening bank accounts; indirectly it has back their produce for selling later at a promoted thrift habit and efficient better price. Do you know that even today, allocation of financial resources more than 10 per cent of goods produced particularly in rural areas. Banks also in farms are wasted due to lack of storage? could mobile funds of more than Rs. Therefore, government intervention 2,00,000 crores through these accounts. became necessary to regulate the activities of the private traders. 5.4 AGRICULTURAL MARKET SYSTEM Let us discuss four such measures Have you ever asked yourself how food that were initiated to improve the grains, vegetables and fruits that we marketing aspect. The first step was consume daily come from different regulation of markets to create orderly parts of the country? The mechanism and transparent marketing conditions. through which these goods reach By and large, this policy benefited different places depends on the market farmers as well as consumers. However, channels. Agricultural marketing is a there is still a need to develop about process that involves the assembling, 27,000 rural periodic markets as storage, processing, transportation, regulated market places to realise the packaging, grading and distribution full potential of rural markets. Second of different agricultural commodities component is provision of physical across the country. infrastructure facilities like roads, Prior to independence, farmers, railways, warehouses, godowns, cold while selling their produce to traders, storages and processing units. The suffered from faulty weighing and current infrastructure facilities are quite manipulation of accounts. Farmers who inadequate to meet the growing demand did not have the required information on and need to be improved. Cooperative Fig. 5.1 Regulated market yards benefit farmers as well as consumers 80 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 2024-25 Work These Out Ø Visit a nearby vegetable and fruit market. Observe and identify different characteristics of the market. Identify the place of origin of at least ten different fruits and vegetables and distance travelled to reach the market. Further, look at the modes of transport and its implication on prices. Ø Most small towns have regulated market yards. Farmers can go to these markets and sell their produce. They can also store their goods in the yard. Visit one regulated market yard; collect the details of its functioning, kind of goods coming to the yard and how prices are fixed. Prepare a detailed report and discuss in the class. marketing, in realising fair prices for need for government intervention is farmers’ products, is the third aspect imminent particularly when a large of government initiative. The success share of agricultural products,  is of milk cooperatives in transforming the handled by the private sector. social and economic landscape of Agricultural marketing has come Gujarat and some other parts of the a long way with the intervention of the country is testimony to the role of government in various forms. Some cooperatives. However cooperatives scholars argue that commercialisation have received a setback during the of agriculture offers tremendous scope recent past due to inadequate coverage for farmers to earn higher incomes of farmer members, lack of appropriate provided the government intervention link between marketing and processing is restricted. What do you think about cooperatives and inefficient financial this view? management. The fourth element is the policy instruments like (i) assurance of Emerging Alternate Marketing minimum support prices (MSP) for Channels: It has been realised that if farmers directly sell their produce to agricultural products (ii) maintenance consumers, it increases their incomes. of buffer stocks of wheat and rice Some examples of these channels are by Food Corporation of India and Apni Mandi (Punjab, Haryana and (iii) distribution of food grains and sugar Rajasthan); Hadaspar Mandi (Pune); through PDS. These instruments are Rythu Bazars (vegetable and fruit aimed at protecting the income of the markets in Andhra Pradesh and farmers and providing foodgrains at a Telangana) and Uzhavar Sandies subsidised rate to the poor. However, (farmers markets in Tamil Nadu). despite government intervention, private Further, several national and trade (by moneylenders, rural political multinational fast food chains are elites, big merchants and rich farmers) increasingly entering into contracts/ predominates agricultural markets. The alliances with farmers to encourage RURAL DEVELOPMENT 81 2024-25 them to cultivate farm products greater risk in depending exclusively (vegetables, fruits, etc.) of the desired on farming for l ivelihood. quality by providing them with not only Diversification towards new areas is seeds and other inputs but also assured necessary not only to reduce the risk procurement of the produce at pre- from agriculture sector but also to decided prices. It is argued that such provide productive sustainable arrangements will help in reducing the livelihood options to rural people. price risks of farmers and would also Much of the agricultural employment expand the markets for farm products. activities are concentrated in the Do you think such arrangements raise Kharif season. But during the Rabi incomes of small farmers. season, in areas where there are inadequate  irrigation facilities, it Work This Out becomes difficult to find gainful employment. Therefore expansion ØVisit one such alternative marketing into other sectors is essential to system which farmers in your provide supplementary gainful locality, or in the neighbourhood rural areas, use. How are they employment and in realising higher different from regulated market levels of income for rural people to yards? Should they be encouraged overcome poverty and other and supported by the government? tribulations. Hence, there is a need to Why and how? Discuss. focus on allied activities, non-farm employment and other emerging In 2020, Indian Parliament passed alternatives of livelihood, though three laws to reform agriculture there are many other options available marketing system. While some section for providing sustainable livelihoods of farmers support these reforms, the in rural areas. rest of the farmers oppose and these Acts are still being debated. Collect the details of these laws, debate and discuss in the class. 5.5 DIVERSIFICATION INTO PRODUCTIVE ACTIVITIES Diversification includes two aspects one relates to change in cropping pattern and the other relates to a shift of workforce from agriculture to other allied activities (livestock, poultry, fisheries etc.) and non-agriculture sector. The need for diversification Fig. 5.2 Jaggery making is an allied activity arises from the fact that there is of the farming sector 82 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 2024-25 Box 5.2: Tamil Nadu Women in Agriculture (TANWA) Tamil Nadu Women in Agriculture (TANWA) was a project initiated in the late 1980s in Tamil Nadu to train women in latest agricultural techniques and in organic farming. It encouraged women to actively participate in raising agricultural productivity and family income. At a Farm Women’s Group in Thiruchirapalli, run by Anthoniammal, trained women are successfully making and selling vermicompost and earning money from this venture. Many other Farm Women’s Groups are creating savings in their group by functioning like mini banks through a micro-credit system.  With the accumulated savings, they promote small-scale household activities like mushroom cultivation, soap manufacture, doll making or other income-generating activities. There could be similar initiatives in your area or your neighborhood rural areas. Talk to organisation or women entrepreneurs and discuss the details in the class. As agriculture is already are the widely held species. Livestock overcrowded, a major proportion of the production provides increased stability increasing labour force needs to find in income, food security, transport, fuel alternate employment opportunities in and nutrition for the family without other non-farm sectors. Non-farm disrupting other food-producing economy has several segments in it; activities. Today, livestock sector alone some possess dynamic linkages that provides alternate livelihood options to permit healthy growth while others are over 70 million small and marginal in subsistence, low productivity farmers including landless labourers. A propositions. The dynamic sub-sectors significant number of women also find include agro-processing industries, employment in the livestock sector. food processing industries, leather Chart 5.1 shows the distribution of industry, tourism, etc. Those sectors livestock in India. Poultry accounts for which have the potential but seriously the largest share with 61 per cent lack infrastructure and other Chart 5.1: Distribution of Poultry and support include traditional Livestock in India, 2019 home-based industries like pottery, crafts, handlooms etc. Majority of rural women find employment in agriculture while men generally look for non-farm employment. In recent times, women have also begun looking for non-farm jobs (see Box 5.2). Animal Husbandry: In India, the farming community uses the mixed crop-livestock farming system —cattle, goats, fowl RURAL DEVELOPMENT 83 2024-25 also emerging as important productive sectors for diversification. Fisheries: The fishing community regards the water body as ‘mother’ or ‘provider’. The water bodies consisting of sea, oceans, rivers, lakes, natural aquatic ponds, streams etc. are, therefore, an integral and life-giving Fig. 5.3 Sheep rearing — an important income source for the fishing community. In augmenting activity in rural areas India, after progressive increase in followed by others. Other animals which budgetary allocations and introduction include camels, asses, horses, ponies of new technologies in fisheries and and mules are in the lowest rung. India aquaculture, the development of had about 303 million cattle, including fisheries has come a long way. 110 million buffaloes in 2019. Presently, fish production from inland Performance of the Indian dairy sector sources contributes about 65 per cent over the last three decades has been to the total value of fish production and quite impressive. Milk production in the balance 35 per cent comes from the the country has increased by about ten marine sector (sea and oceans). Today times between 1951-2016. This  can total fish production accounts for be attributed mainly to the successful 0.9 per cent of the total GDP. In India, implementation of ‘Operation Flood’. It West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, is a system whereby all the farmers can Gujarat, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu pool their milk produced according to different grading (based on quality), are major fish producing states. A large processed and marketed to urban share of fishworker families are poor. centres through cooperatives. In this Rampant underemployment, low per system the farmers are assured of a fair capita earnings, absence of mobility price and income from the supply of of labour to other sectors and a high milk to urban markets. As pointed out rate of illiteracy and indebtedness are earlier Gujarat state is held as a some of the major problems fishing success story in the efficient community face today. Even though implementation of milk cooperatives women are not involved in active which has been emulated by many fishing, about 60 per cent of the states. Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar workforce in export marketing and 40 Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, per cent in internal marketing are Maharashtra, Punjab and Rajasthan, women. There is a need to increase are major milk producing states. Meat, credit facilities through cooperatives eggs, wool and other by- products are and SHGs for fisherwomen to meet the 84 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 2024-25 working capital requirements for marketing. Horticulture: Blessed with a varying climate and soil conditions, India has adopted growing of diverse horticultural crops such as fruits, vegetables, tuber crops, flowers, medicinal and aromatic plants, spices and plantation crops. These crops play a vital role in providing food and nutrition, besides addressing employment concerns. Horticulture sector contributes nearly one-third of the value of agriculture output and Fig. 5.5 Women in rural households take up beekeeping as an entrepreneurial activity six per cent of Gross Domestic Product of India. India has emerged as a world maintenance, hybrid seed production leader in producing a variety of fruits and tissue culture, propagation of like mangoes, bananas, coconuts, fruits and flowers and  food processing cashew nuts and a number of spices are highly remunerative employment and is the second largest producer of options for women in rural areas. fruits and vegetables.  Economic Though, in terms of numbers, our condition of many farmers engaged in livestock population is quite horticulture has improved and it has impressive but its productivity is quite become a means of improving low as compared to other countries. It livelihood for many unprivileged requires improved technology and classes. Flower harvesting, nursery promotion of good breeds of animals to enhance productivity. Improved veterinary care and credit facilities to small and marginal farmers and landless labourers would enhance sustainable livelihood options through livestock production. Production of fisheries has already increased substantially. However problems related to over- fishing and pollution need to be regulated Fig. 5.4 Poultry has the largest share of total livestock in India RURAL DEVELOPMENT 85 2024-25 and controlled. Welfare programmes for prices, weather and soil conditions for the fishing community have to be growing different crops etc. Though reoriented in a manner which can provide IT is, by itself, no catalyst of change long-term gains and sustenance of but it can act as a tool for releasing livelihoods. Horticulture has emerged as the creative potential and knowledge a successful sustainable livelihood embedded in the society. It also has option and needs to be encouraged potential of employment generation in significantly. Enhancing its role requires rural areas. Experiments with IT and investment in infrastructure like its application to rural development are electricity, cold storage systems, carried out in different parts of India. marketing linkages, small-scale processing units and technology improvement and dissemination. 5.6 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT AND ORGANIC FARMING Other Alternate Livelihood Options: In recent years, awareness of the The IT has revolutionised many sectors harmful effect of chemical-based in the Indian economy. There is broad fertilisers and pesticides on our health consensus that IT can play a critical is on a rise. Conventional agriculture role in achieving sustainable development and food security in the relies heavily on chemical fertilisers twenty-first century. Governments can and toxic pesticides etc., which enter predict areas of food insecurity and the food supply, penetrate the water vulnerability using appropriate sources, harm the livestock, deplete the information and software tools so that soil and devastate natural eco-systems. action can be taken to prevent or Efforts in evolving technologies which reduce the likelihood of an emergency. are eco-friendly are essential for It also has  a positive impact on the sustainable development and one agriculture sector as it can disseminate such technology which is eco-friendly information regarding emerging is organic farming. In short, organic technologies and its applications, agriculture is a whole system of Box 5.3: Adoption of Village by Parliamentarians In October, 2014, The Government of India introduced a new scheme called Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY). Under this scheme, Members of India's Parliament need to identify and develop one village from their constituencies. To begin with, MPs can develop one village as a model village by 2016, and two more by 2019, covering over 2,500 villages in India. According to the scheme, the village can have a population of 3,000-5,000 in the plains and 1,000-3,000 in the hills and should not be MPs' own or their spouse's village. MPs are expected to facilitate a village development plan, motivate villagers to take up activities and built infrastructure in the areas of health, nutrition and education. Source: www.pib.nic.in accessed on 24 October 2014. 86 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 2024-25 Box 5.4: Organic Food Organic food is growing in popularity across the world. Many countries have around 10 per cent of their food system under organic farming. There are many retail chains and supermarkets which are accorded with green status to sell organic food. Moreover, organic foods command higher price of around 10-100 per cent than conventional ones. farming that restores, maintains and have shown that organically grown food enhances the ecological balance. There has more nutritional value than is an increasing demand for chemical farming thus providing us organically grown food to enhance with healthy foods. Since organic food safety throughout the world (see farming requires more labour input Box 5.4). than conventional farming, India will find organic farming an attractive Benefits of Organic Farming: proposition. Finally, the produce is Organic agriculture offers a means to pesticide-free and produced in an substitute costlier agricultural inputs environmentally sustainable way (see (such as HYV seeds, chemical fertilisers, Box 5.5). pesticides etc.) with locally produced Popularising organic farming organic inputs that are cheaper and requires awareness and willingness on thereby generate good returns on the part of farmers to adapt to new investment. Organic agriculture also technology. Inadequate infrastructure generates income through exports as and the problem of marketing the the demand for organically grown crops products are major concerns which is on a rise. Studies across countries need to be addressed apart from an Box 5.5: Organically Produced Cotton in Maharashtra In 1995, when Kisan Mehta of Prakruti (an NGO) first suggested that cotton, the biggest user of chemical pesticides, could be grown organically, the then Director of the Central Institute for Cotton Research, Nagpur, famously remarked, “Do you want India to go naked?”  At present, as many as 130 farmers have committed 1,200 hectares of land to grow cotton organically on the International Federation of Organic Agriculture Movement’s standards.  The produce was later tested by the German Accredited Agency, AGRECO, and found to be of high quality. Kisan Mehta feels that about 78 per cent of Indian farmers are marginal farmers owning about less than 0.8 hectare but accounting for 20 per cent of India’s cultivable land. For such farmers, organic agriculture is more profitable in terms of money and soil conservation in the long run. Visit a farm in your locality which uses organic manure and discuss the uses associated with the farming practices. Present the report in your class. Source: Lyla Bavadam, A Green Alternative, Frontline, 29 July 2005. RURAL DEVELOPMENT 87 2024-25 appropriate agriculture policy to sector might continue to remain promote organic farming. It has been backward. There is a greater need observed that the yields from organic today to make rural areas more farming are less than modern vibrant through diversification into agricultural farming in the initial years. dairying, poultry,  f isheries, Therefore, small and marginal farmers vegetables and fruits and linking up may find it difficult to adapt to large- the rural production centres with the scale production. Organic produce may urban and foreign (export) markets also have more blemishes and a shorter to realise higher returns on the shelf life than sprayed produce. investments for the products. Moreover choice in production of Moreover, infrastructure elements off-season crops is quite limited in like credit and marketing, farmerorganic farming. Nevertheless, organic friendly agricultural policies and a farming helps in sustainable constant appraisal and dialogue development of agriculture and India between farmers’ groups and state has a clear advantage in producing agricultural departments are organic products for both domestic and essential to realise the full potential international markets. Do you think of the sector. food and non-food items cultivated Today we cannot look at the using organic farming methods will be environment and rural development as cheaper? two distinct subjects. There is need to invent or procure alternate sets of eco5.7 CONCLUSION friendly technologies that lead to It is clear that until and unless some sustainable development in different spectacular changes occur, the rural circumstances. From these, each rural Work These Out Ø Make a list of five popular items that are organically produced in India. Ø Visit a nearby super market, vegetable shop and/or a departmental shop. Identify a few products. Prepare a chart comparing a few goods that are produced organically and in the normal way on the basis of their prices, shelf life, quality and the kind of advertisement through which they are popularised. Ø Visit a horticultural farm in the nearby locality. Collect the details of goods that they cultivate on the farm. They could have diversified their cropping patterns. Discuss with them the merits and demerits of the diversification. 88 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 2024-25 community can choose whatever will development experiments that have suit its purpose. We need to learn already been carried out in similar from, and also try out when found conditions in different parts of India), relevant, practices from the available to speed up this process of ‘learning set of ‘best practice’ illustrations (which by doing’. means success stories of rural Recap ØRural development is quite a comprehensive term but it essentially means a plan of action for the development of rural areas which are lagging behind in socio-economic development. ØThere is a need for improving the quantity and quality of infrastructure in rural areas such as banking, marketing, storage, transport and communications etc. to realise its true potential. ØDiversification towards new areas such as livestock, fisheries and other non-agricultural activities is necessary not only to reduce the risk from agriculture sector but also to provide productive sustainable livelihood options to our rural people. ØThe importance of organic farming as an environmentally sustainable production process is on a rise and needs to be promoted. EXERCISES 1. What do you mean by rural development? Bring out the key issues in rural development. 2. Discuss the importance of credit in rural development. 3. Explain the role of micro-credit in meeting credit requirements of the poor. 4. Explain the steps taken by the government in developing rural markets. 5. Why is agricultural diversification essential for sustainable livelihoods? 6. Critically evaluate the role of the rural banking system in the process of rural development in India. RURAL DEVELOPMENT 89 2024-25 7. What do you mean by agricultural marketing? 8. Mention some obstacles that hinder the mechanism of agricultural marketing. 9. What are the alternative channels available for agricultural marketing? Give some examples. 10. Distinguish between ‘Green Revolution’ and ‘Golden Revolution’. 11. Do you think various measures taken by the government to improve agricultural marketing are sufficient? Discuss. 12. Explain the role of non-farm employment in promoting rural diversification. 13. Bring out the importance of animal husbandry, fisheries and horticulture as a source of diversification. 14. ‘Information technology plays a very significant role in achieving sustainable development and food security’ — comment. 15. What is organic farming and how does it promote sustainable development? 16. Identify the benefits and limitations of organic farming. 17. Enlist some problems faced by farmers during the initial years of organic farming. 18. “Jan-Dhan-Yojna helps in the rural development.” Do you agree with this statement? Explain. REFERENCES ACHARYA, S.S. 2004. Agricultural Marketing, State of the Indian Farmer, a Millennium Study. Academic Foundation, New Delhi. ALAGH, Y.K. 2004. State of the Indian Farmer, a Millennium Study —  an Overview. Academic Foundation, New Delhi. CHAWLA, N.K., M.P.G. KURUP and V. P. SHARMA. 2004. Animal Husbandry, State of the Indian Farmer, a Millennium Study. Academic Foundation, New Delhi. DEHADRAI, P.V.  and Y.S. YADAV. 2004. Fisheries Development, State of the Indian Farmer, a Millennium Study. Academic Foundation, New Delhi. JALAN, BIMAL. (Ed.). 1992. The Indian Economy: Problems and Perspectives. Penguin Publication, New Delhi. 90 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 2024-25 NARAYANAN, S. 2005. Organic Farming in India. NABARD Occasional Paper No: 38, Department of Agriculture and Rural Development, Mumbai. SINGH, H.P., P.P. DUTTA and M. SUDHA. 2004. Horticulture Development, State of the Indian Farmer, a Millennium Study. Academic Foundation, New Delhi. SINGH, SURJIT  and VIDYA SAGAR. 2004. Agricultural Credit in India: State of the Indian Farmer, a Millennium Study. Academic Foundation, New Delhi. SINHA, V.K. 1998. Challenges in Rural Development. Discovery Publishing House, New Delhi. TODARO, MICHAEL P. 1987. Economic Development in the Third World. Orient Longman Ltd, Hyderabad. TOPPO, E. 2004. Organic Vegetable Gardening: Grow Your Own Vegetables. Unit for Labour Studies, Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai. Government Reports Successful Governance Initiatives and Best Practices: Experiences from Indian States, Government of India in Coordination with Human Resource Development Centre and UNDP, Planning Commission, Delhi, 2002. Annual Reports, Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India, New Delhi. Basic Animal Husbandry and Fisheries Statistics ( for various years), Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare, Government of India. Websites www.dahd.nic.in www.saanjhi.gov.in www.ruralindiaonline.org RURAL DEVELOPMENT 91 2024-25