7 ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT After studying this chapter, the learners will • understand the concept of environment • analyse the causes and effects of ‘environmental degradation’ and ‘resource depletion’ • understand the nature of environmental challenges facing India • relate environmental issues to the larger context of sustainable development. ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 115 2024-25 The environment, left to itself, can continue to support life for millions of years. The single most unstable and potentially disruptive element in the scheme is the human species. Human beings, with modern technology, have the capacity to bring about, intentionally or unintentionally, far-reaching and irreversible changes in the enviornment. Anonymous 7.1 INTRODUCTION and abiotic factors that influence each other. While all living elements—the In the earlier chapters we have birds, animals and plants, forests, discussed the main economic issues fisheries etc.—are biotic elements, faced by the Indian economy. The abiotic elements include air, water, land economic development that we have etc. Rocks and sunlight are examples achieved so far has come at a very heavy of abiotic elements of the environment. price — at the cost of environmental A study of the environment then calls quality. As we step into an era of for a study of the inter-relationship globalisation that promises higher between these biotic and abiotic economic growth, we have to bear in components of the environment. mind the adverse consequences of the past developmental path on our Functions of the Environment: The environment and consciously choose a environment performs four vital path of sustainable development. To functions (i) it supplies resources: understand the unsustainable path of resources here include both renewable development that we have taken and and non-renewable resources. the challenges of sustainable Renewable resources are those which development, we have to first can be used without the possibility of understand the significance and the resource becoming depleted or contribution of environment to exhausted. That is, a continuous economic development. With this in supply of the resource remains mind, this chapter is divided into three available. Examples of renewable sections. The first part deals with the resources are the trees in the forests and functions and role of environment. The the fishes in the ocean. Non-renewable second section discusses the state of resources, on the other hand, are those India’s environment and the third which get exhausted with extraction section deals with steps and strategies and use,  for example, fossil fuel (ii) it to achieve sustainable development. assimilates waste (iii) it sustains life by providing genetic and bio diversity and 7.2  ENVIRONMENT — DEFINITION AND (iv) it also provides aesthetic services FUNCTIONS like scenery etc. Environment is defined as the total The environment is able to perform planetary inheritance and the totality these functions without any interruption of all resources. It includes all the biotic as long as the demand on these 116 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 2024-25 this results in an environmental crisis. This is the situation today all over the world. The rising population of the developing countries and the affluent consumption and production standards of the developed world have placed a huge stress on the environment in terms of its first two functions. Many resources have become extinct and the wastes generated are beyond the absorptive capacity of the environment. Absorptive Fig. 7.1 Water bodies: small, snow-fed Himalayan streams are capacity means the ability the few fresh-water sources that remain unpolluted. of the environment to functions is within its carrying absorb degradation. The result — we capacity. This implies that the resource are today at the threshold of extraction is not above the rate of environmental crisis. The past regeneration of the resource and the development has polluted and dried up wastes generated are within the rivers and other aquifers making water assimilating capacity of the an economic good. Besides, the environment. When this is not so, the intensive and extensive extraction of environment fails to perform its third both renewable and non-renewable and vital function of life sustenance and resources has exhausted some of these Work These Out Ø Why has water become an economic commodity? Discuss. Ø Fill in the following table with some common types of diseases and illnesses that are caused due to air, water and noise pollution. Air Pollution Water Pollution Noise Pollution Asthma Cholera ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 117 2024-25 Box 7.1: Global Warming Global warming is a gradual increase in the average temperature of the earth’s lower atmosphere as a result of the increase in greenhouse gases since the Industrial Revolution. Much of the recent observed and projected global warming is human-induced. It is caused by man-made increases in carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases through the burning of fossil fuels and deforestation. Adding carbon dioxide, methane and such other gases (that have the potential to absorb heat) to the atmosphere with no other changes will make our planet’s surface warmer. The atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide and CH  have increased by 31 per cent and 149 per cent 4 respectively above pre-industrial levels since 1750. During the past century, the atmospheric temperature has risen by 1.1°F (0.6°C) and sea level has risen several inches. Some of the longer-term results of global warming are melting of polar ice with a resulting rise in sea level and coastal flooding; disruption of drinking water supplies dependent on snow melts; extinction of species as ecological niches disappear; more frequent tropical storms; and an increased incidence of tropical diseases. Among factors that may be contributing to global warming are the burning of coal and petroleum products (sources of carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, ozone); deforestation, which increases the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere; methane gas released in animal waste; and increased cattle production, which contributes to deforestation, methane production, and use of fossil fuels. A UN Conference on Climate Change, held in Kyoto, Japan, in 1997, resulted in an international agreement to fight global warming which called for reductions in emissions of greenhouse gases by industrialised nations. Source: www.wikipedia.org vital resources and we are compelled Thus, it is clear that the opportunity to spend huge amounts on technology costs of negative environmental and research to explore new resources. impacts are high. Added to these are the health costs of The biggest question that arises is: degraded environmental quality — are environmental problems new to this decline in air and water quality (seventy century? If so, why? The answer to this per cent of water in India is polluted) question requires some elaboration. In have resulted in increased incidence of the early days when civilisation just respiratory  and water-borne diseases. began, or before this phenomenal Hence the expenditure on health is also increase in population, and before rising. To make matters worse, global countries took to industrialisation, the environmental issues such as global demand for environmental resources warming and ozone depletion also and services was much less than their contribute to increased financial supply. This meant that pollution was commitments for the government. within the absorptive capacity of the 118 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 2024-25 Box 7.2: Ozone Depletion Ozone depletion refers to the phenomenon of reductions in the amount of ozone in the stratosphere. The problem of ozone depletion is caused by high levels of chlorine and bromine compounds in the stratosphere. The origins of these compounds are chlorofluorocarbons (CFC), used as cooling substances in airconditioners and refrigerators, or as aerosol propellants, and bromofluorocarbons (halons), used in fire extinguishers. As a result of depletion of the ozone layer, more ultraviolet (UV) radiation comes to Earth and causes damage to living organisms. UV radiation seems responsible for skin cancer in humans; it also lowers production of phytoplankton and thus affects other aquatic organisms. It can also influence the growth of terrestrial plants. A reduction of approximately 5 per cent in the ozone layer was detected from 1979 to 1990. Since the ozone layer prevents most harmful wavelengths of ultraviolet light from passing through the Earth’s atmosphere, observed and projected decreases in ozone have generated worldwide concern. This led to the adoption of the Montreal Protocol banning the use of chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) compounds, as well as other ozone depleting chemicals such as carbon tetrachloride, trichloroethane (also known as methyl chloroform), and bromine compounds known as halons. Source: www.ceu.hu environment and the rate of resource But with population explosion and with extraction was less than the rate of the advent of industrial revolution regeneration of these resources. Hence to meet the growing needs of the environmental problems did not arise. expanding population, things changed. The result was that the demand for resources for both production and consumption went beyond the rate of regeneration of the resources; the pressure on the absorptive capacity of the environment increased tremendously — this trend continues even today. Thus what has happened is a reversal of supply-demand relationship for environmental quality — we are now faced with increased Fig. 7.2 Damodar Valley is one of  India’s most demand for environmental industrialised regions. Pollutants from the  heavy resources and services but their industries along the banks of the Damodar river are converting it into an ecological disaster supply is limited due to overuse ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 119 2024-25 and misuse. Hence the environmental issues of waste generation and pollution have become critical today. 7.3 STATE OF INDIA’S ENVIRONMENT India has abundant natural resources in terms of rich quality of soil, hundreds of rivers and tributaries, Fig. 7.3 Deforestation leads to land degradation, biodiversity  loss and lush green forests, air pollution plenty of mineral deposits beneath the land surface, vast pressure on its finite natural stretch of the Indian Ocean, ranges of resources, besides creating impacts on mountains, etc. The black soil of the human health and well-being. The Deccan Plateau is particularly suitable threat to India’s environment poses a for cultivation of cotton, leading to dichotomy—threat of poverty-induced concentration of textile industries in this environmental degradation and, at the region. The Indo-Gangetic plains — same time, threat of pollution from spread from the Arabian Sea to the Bay affluence and a rapidly growing of Bengal — are one of the most fertile, industrial sector. Air pollution, intensively cultivated and densely water contamination, soil erosion, populated regions in the world. India’s deforestation and wildlife extinction forests, though unevenly distributed, are some of the most pressing provide green cover for a majority of its environmental concerns of India. The population and natural cover for its priority issues identified are (i) land wildlife. Large deposits of iron-ore, coal degradation (ii) biodiversity loss (iii) air and natural gas are found in the pollution with special reference to country. India accounts for nearly 8 per cent of the world’s total iron-ore vehicular pollution in urban cities (iv) reserves. Bauxite, copper, chromate, management of fresh water and (v) solid diamonds, gold, lead, lignite, waste management. Land in India manganese, zinc, uranium, etc. are also suffers from varying degrees and types available in different parts of the of degradation stemming mainly from country. However, the developmental unstable use and inappropriate activities in India have resulted in management practices. 120 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 2024-25 Box. 7.3: Chipko or Appiko — What’s in a Name? You may be aware of the Chipko Movement, which aimed at protecting forests in the Himalayas. In Karnataka, a similar movement took a different name, ‘Appiko’, which means to hug. On 8 September 1983, when the felling of trees was started in Salkani forest in Sirsi district, 160 men, women and children hugged the trees and forced the woodcutters to leave. They kept vigil in the forest over the next six weeks. Only after the forest officials assured the volunteers that the trees will be cut scientifically and in accordance with the working plan of the district, did they leave the trees. When commercial felling by contractors damaged a large number of natural forests, the idea of hugging the trees gave the people hope and confidence that they can protect the forests. On that particular incident, with the felling discontinued, the people saved 12,000 trees. Within months, this movement spread to many adjoining districts. Indiscriminate felling of trees for fuelwood and for industrial use has led to many environmental problems. Twelve years after setting up of a paper mill in Uttar Kanara area, bamboo has been wiped out from that area. “Broad-leaved trees which protected the soil from the direct onslaught of rain have been removed, the soil washed away, and bare laterite soil left behind. Now nothing grows but a weed”, says a farmer. Farmers also complain that rivers and rivulets dry up quicker, and that rainfall is becoming erratic. Diseases and insects earlier unknown are now attacking the crops. Appiko volunteers want the contractors and forest officials to follow certain rules and restrictions. For instance, local people should be consulted when trees are marked for felling and trees within 100 metres of a water source and on a slope of 30 degrees or above should not be felled. Do you know that the government allocates forestlands to industries to use forest materials as industrial raw material? Even if a paper mill employs 10,000 workers and a plywood factory employs 800 people but if they deprive the daily needs of a million people, is it acceptable? What do you think? Source: Excerpts from  ‘State of India’s Environment 2: The Second Citizens’ Report 1984-85’, Centre for Science and Environment, 1996, New Delhi. ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 121 2024-25 Some of the factors responsible the competing uses of land for for land degradation are (i) loss forestry, agriculture, pastures, human of vegetation occuring due to settlements and industries exert an deforestation (ii) unsustainable fuel enormous pressure on the country’s wood and fodder extraction (iii) shifting finite land resources. cultivation (iv) encroachment into forest The per capita forest land in the lands (v) forest fires and over grazing country is only 0.06 hectare against (vi) non-adoption of adequate soil the requirement of 0.47 hectare to meet conservation measures (vii) improper basic needs, resulting in an excess crop rotation (viii) indiscriminate use of felling of about 15 million cubic metre agro-chemicals such as fertilisers and forests over the permissible limit. pesticides (ix) improper planning and Estimates of soil erosion show that management of irrigation systems soil is being eroded at a rate of 5.3 (x) extraction of ground water in billion tonnes a year for the entire Work These Out Ø In order to enable the students to appreciate the contribution of environment to economic development, the following game can be introduced. One student may name a product used by any enterprise and the other student may trace out its roots to nature and earth. trucks steel and rubber steel iron mineral earth rubber trees forests earth books paper trees forest earth cloth cotton plant nature petrol earth machinery iron mineral earth Ø A truck driver had to pay Rs 10,000 as challan as his truck was emitting black soot. Why do you think he was penalised? Was it justified? Discuss. excess of the recharge capacity (xi) country as a result of which the open access resource and (xii) poverty country loses 0.8 million tonnes of of the agriculture-dependent people. nitrogen, 1.8 million tonnes of India supports approximately 17 phosphorus and 26.3 million tonnes per cent of the world’s human and 20 of potassium every year. According to per cent of livestock population on a the Government of India, the quantity mere 2.5 per cent of the world’s of nutrients lost due to erosion each geographical area. The high density year ranges from 5.8 to 8.4 million of population and livestock and tonnes. 122 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 2024-25 Box 7.4 : Pollution Control Boards In order to address two major environmental concerns in India, viz. water and air pollution, the government set up the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) in 1974. This was followed by states establishing their own state level boards to address all the environmental concerns. They investigate, collect and disseminate information relating to water, air and land pollution, lay down standards for sewage/trade effluent and emissions. These boards provide technical assistance to governments in promoting cleanliness of streams and wells by prevention, control and abatement of water pollution, and improve the quality of air and to prevent, control or abate air pollution in the country. These boards also carry out and sponsor investigation and research relating to problems of water and air pollution and for their prevention, control or abatement. They organise, through mass media, a comprehensive mass awareness programme for the same. The PCBs prepare manuals, codes and guidelines relating to treatment and disposal of sewage and trade effluents. They assess the air quality through regulation of industries. In fact, state boards, through their district level officials, periodically inspect every industry under their jurisdiction to assess the adequacy of treatment measures provided to treat the effluent and gaseous emissions. It also provides background air quality data needed for industrial siting and town planning. The pollution control boards collect, collate and disseminate technical and statistical data relating to water pollution. They monitor the quality of water in 125 rivers (including the tributaries), wells, lakes, creeks, ponds, tanks, drains and canals. Ø Visit a nearby factory/irrigation department and collect the details of measures that they adopt to control water and air pollution. Ø You might be seeing advertisements in newspapers, radio and television or billboards in your locality on awareness programmes relating to water and air pollution. Collect a few news-clippings, pamphlets and other information and discuss them in the classroom. In India, air pollution is widespread vehicles (two-wheeled vehicles and cars in urban areas where vehicles are the only) constituted about 85 per cent of major contributors and in a few other the total number of registered vehicles areas which have a high concentration thus contributing significantly to total of industries and thermal power plants. air pollution load. Vehicular emissions are of particular India is one of the ten most concern since these are ground level industrialised nations of the world. sources and, thus, have the maximum But this status has brought with impact on the general population. The it unwanted and unanticipated number of motor vehicles has increased consequences such as unplanned from about 3 lakh in 1951 to 30 crores urbanisation, pollution and the risk of in 2019. In 2016, personal transport accidents. The CPCB (Central Pollution ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 123 2024-25 Control Board) has identified seventeen allow all future generations to have a categories of industries (large potential average quality of life that is and medium scale) as significantly at least as high as that which is being polluting (See Box 7.4). enjoyed by the current generation. The concept of sustainable development Work This Out was emphasised by the United Nations Conference on Environment and Ø You can see a column on the Development (UNCED), which defined measure of air  pollution in it as: ‘Development that meets the need any national daily. Cut out of the present generation without the news item a week before compromising the ability of the future Diwali, on the day of Diwali generation to meet their own needs’. and two days after Diwali. Read the definition again. You will Do you observe a significant difference in the value? notice that the term ‘need’ and the Discuss in your class. phrase ‘future generations’ in the definition are the catch phrases. The The above points highlight the use of the concept ‘needs’ in the challenges to India’s environment. The definition is linked to distribution of various measures adopted by the resources. The seminal report —Our Ministry of Environment and the Common Future—that gave the above central and state pollution control definition explained sustainable boards may not yield reward unless development as  ‘meeting the basic we consciously adopt a path of needs of all and extending to all the sustainable development. The concern opportunity to satisfy their aspirations for future generations alone can make for a better life’. Meeting the needs of development last forever. Development all requires redistributing resources to enhance our current living styles, and is hence a moral issue. without concern for posterity, will Edward Barbier defined sustainable deplete resources and degrade development as one which is directly environment at a pace that is bound to concerned with increasing the material result in both environmental and standard of living of the poor at economic crisis. the grass root level — this can be quantitatively measured in terms of 7.4 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT increased income, real income, Environment and economy are educational services, health care, interdependent and need each other. sanitation, water supply etc. In more Hence, development that ignores its specific terms, sustainable development repercussions on the environment will aims at decreasing the absolute poverty destroy the environment that sustains of the poor by providing lasting and life forms. What is needed is sustainable secure livelihoods that minimise development: development that will resource depletion, environmental 124 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 2024-25 degradation, cultural disruption and beyond the carrying capacity of the earth social instability. Sustainable and deviates from sustainable development is, in this sense, a development (ii) technological progress development that meets the basic needs should be input efficient and not input of all, particularly the poor majority, for consuming (iii) renewable resources employment, food, energy, water, should be extracted on a sustainable basis, housing, and ensures growth of that is, rate of extraction should not exceed agriculture, manufacturing, power and rate of regeneration (iv) for non-renewable services to meet these needs. resources rate of depletion should not The Brundtland Commission exceed the rate of creation of renewable emphasises on protecting the future substitutes and (v) inefficiencies arising generation. This is in line with the from pollution should be corrected. In argument of the environmentalists who 2015, the UN formulated 17 Sustainable emphasise that we have a moral Development Goals (SDGs) intended to be obligation to hand over the planet earth achieved by the year 2030. Collect the in good order to the future generation; details of those goals and discuss them in that is, the present generation should the context of India. bequeath a better environment to the future generation. At least we should 7.5 STRATEGIES FOR SUSTAINABLE leave to the next generation a stock of DEVELOPMENT ‘quality of life’ assets no less than what we have inherited. Use of Non-conventional Sources of The present generation can Energy: India, as you know, is hugely promote development that enhances dependent on thermal and hydro the natural and built environment in power plants to meet its power ways that are compatible with needs. Both of these have adverse (i) conservation of natural assets environmental impacts. Thermal power (ii) preservation of the regenerative plants emit large quantities of carbon capacity of the world’s  natural dioxide which is a green house gas. It ecological system (iii) avoiding the also produces fly ash which,  if not used imposition of added costs or risks on properly, can cause pollution of water future generations. bodies, land and other components of According to Herman Daly, a leading the environment. Hydroelectric projects environmental economist, to achieve inundate forests and interfere with the sustainable development,   the following natural flow of water in catchment needs to be done  (i) limiting the human areas and the river basins. Wind power population to a level within the carrying and solar rays are good examples of capacity of the environment. The carrying conventional sources of energy. In recent capacity of the environment is like years, some efforts are being taken to a‘plimsoll line’ of the ship which is its load tap these energy resources. Collect the limit mark. In the absence of the plimsoll details of one such unit set up in your line for the economy, human scale grows area if any, and discuss in the class. ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 125 2024-25 LPG, Gobar Gas in Rural Areas: Households in rural areas generally use Work This Out wood, dung cake or other biomass as Ø In Delhi, buses and other public fuel. This practice has several adverse transport vehicles uses CNG as fuel implications like deforestation, instead of petrol or diesel; some reduction in green cover, wastage of vehicles use convertible engines; cattle dung and air pollution. To rectify solar energy is being used to light up the streets. What do you think the situation, subsidised LPG is being about these changes? Delhi also provided. In addition, gobar gas plants adopted odd/even scheme to restrict are being provided through easy loans the use of vehicles with registration and subsidy. As far as liquefied ending with odd/even numbers on petroleum gas (LPG) is concerned, it is alternative days, for specific period a clean fuel — it reduces household in a year. Organise a debate in class pollution to a large extent. Also, energy on the need for sustainable development practices in India. wastage is minimised. For the  gobar gas plant to function, cattle dung is fed few years many other Indian cities also to the plant and gas is produced which began to use CNG. is used as fuel while the slurry which is left over is a very good organic Wind Power: In areas where speed of fertiliser and soil conditioner. wind is usually high, wind mills can provide electricity without any adverse CNG in Urban Areas: In Delhi, the use impact on the environment. Wind of Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) as turbines move with the wind and electricity is generated. No doubt, the fuel in public transport system has initial cost is high. But the benefits are significantly lowered air pollution and such that the high cost gets easily the air has become cleaner. In the last absorbed. Fig.7.4 Gobar Gas Plant uses cattle dung to produce energy 126 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 2024-25 Solar Power through Photovoltaic Traditional Knowledge and Cells: India is naturally endowed with Practices: Traditionally, Indian people a large quantity of solar energy in the have been close to their environment. form of sunlight. We use it in different They have been more a component of ways. For example, we dry our clothes, the environment and not its controller. grains, other agricultural products as If we look back at our agriculture well as various items made for daily use. system, healthcare system, housing, We also use sunlight to warm ourselves transport etc., we find that all practices in winter. Plants use solar energy to have been environment friendly. Only perform photosynthesis. Now, with the recently have we drifted away from the help of photovoltaic cells,  solar energy traditional systems and caused large can be converted into electricity. These scale damage to the environment and cells use special kind of materials to also our  rural heritage. Now, it is time capture solar energy and then convert to go back. One apt example is in the energy into electricity. This healthcare. India is very much technology is extremely useful for remote privileged to have  about 15,000 species areas and for places where supply of of plants which have medicinal power through grid or power lines is properties. About 8,000 of these are in either not possible or proves very costly. regular use in various systems of This technique is also totally free from treatment including the folk tradition. pollution. In recent years India is taking With the sudden onslaught of the efforts to increase the power generation western system of treatment, we through solar. India is also leading an ignored our traditional systems such International body called International as Ayurveda, Unani, Tibetan and folk Solar Alliance (ISA). systems. These healthcare systems are in great demand again for treating Mini-hydel Plants: In mountainous chronic health problems. Now a days regions, streams can be found almost every cosmetic produce — hair oil, everywhere. A large percentage of such toothpaste, body lotion, face cream and streams are perennial. Mini-hydel what not — is herbal in composition. plants use the energy of such streams Not only are these products environment to move small turbines. The turbines friendly, they are relatively free from side generate electricity which can be used effects and do not involve large-scale locally. Such power plants are more or industrial and chemical processing. less environment-friendly as they do not change the land use pattern in areas Biocomposting: In our quest to where they are located; they generate increase agricultural production enough power to meet local demands. during the last five decades or so, we This means that they can also do away almost totally neglected the use of with the need for large scale compost and completely switched over transmission towers and cables and to chemical fertilisers. The result is that avoid transmission loss. large tracts of productive land have ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 127 2024-25 been adversely affected, water bodies In addition, awareness is spreading including ground water system have about various animals and birds which suffered due to chemical contamination help in controlling pests. For example, and demand for irrigation has been snakes are one of the prime group of going up year after year. animals which prey upon rats, mice and Farmers, in large numbers all over various other pests. Similarly, large the country, have again started using varieties of birds, for example, owls and compost made from organic wastes of peacocks, prey upon vermin and pests. different types. In certain parts of the If these are allowed to dwell around the country, cattle are maintained only agricultural areas, they can clear large because they produce dung which is varieties of pests including insects. an important fertiliser and soil Lizards are also important in this conditioner. regard. We need to know their value and Earthworms can convert organic save them. matter into compost faster than the Sustainable development has normal composting process. This become a catch phrase today. It is process is now being widely used. ‘indeed’ a paradigm shift in Indirectly, the civic authorities are development thinking. Though it has benefited too as they have to dispose been interpreted in a number of ways, reduced quantity of waste. adherence to this path ensures lasting development and non-declining welfare Biopest Control:  With the advent of for all. green revolution, the entire country entered into a frenzy to use more and 7.6 CONCLUSION more chemical pesticides for higher Economic development, which aimed at yield. Soon, the adverse impacts began increasing the production of goods and to show; food products were services to meet the needs of a rising contaminated, soil, water bodies and population, puts greater pressure on even ground water were polluted with the environment. In the initial stages pesticides. Even milk, meat and fishes of development, the demand for were found to be contaminated. environmental resources was less than To meet this challenge, efforts are that of supply. Now the world is on to bring in better methods of pest faced with increased demand for control. One such step is the use of environmental resources but their pesticides based on plant products. supply is limited due to overuse and Neem trees are proving to be quite misuse. Sustainable development aims useful. Several types of pest controlling at promoting the kind of development chemicals have been isolated from neem that minimises environmental problems and these are being used. Mixed and meets the needs of the present cropping and growing different crops generation without compromising the in consecutive years on the same land ability of the future generation to meet have also helped farmers. their own needs. 128 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 2024-25 Recap Ø Environment performs four functions: supplies resources, assimilates wastes, sustains life by providing genetic and bio diversity and provides aesthetic services. Ø Population explosion, affluent consumption and production have placed a huge stress on the environment. Ø Developmental activities in India have put immense pressure on its finite natural resources, besides creating impact on human health and well-being. Ø The threat to India’s environment is of two dimensions —threat of poverty induced environmental degradation and the threat of pollution from affluence and a rapidly growing industrial sector. Ø Though the government, through various measures, attempts to safeguard the environment, it is also necessary to adopt a path of sustainable development. Ø Sustainable development is development that meets the need of the present generation without compromising the ability of the future generation to meet their own needs. Ø Promotion of natural resources, conservation, preserving regenerative capacity of ecological system and avoiding the imposition of environmental risks on future generations would lead to sustainable development. EXERCISES 1. What is meant by environment? 2. What happens when the rate of resource extraction exceeds that of their regeneration? 3. Classify the following into renewable and non-renewable resources (i) trees (ii) fish (iii) petroleum (iv) coal (v) iron-ore (vi) water. 4. Two major environmental issues facing the world today are ____________ and _____________. 5. How do the following factors contribute to the environmental crisis in India? What problem do they pose for the government? (i) Rising population (ii) Air pollution ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 129 2024-25 (iii) Water contamination (iv) Affluent consumption standards (v) Illiteracy (vi) Industrialisation (vii) Urbanisation (viii) Reduction of forest coverage (ix) Poaching, and (x) Global warming. 6. What are the functions of the environment? 7. Identify six factors contributing to land degradation in India. 8. Explain how the opportunity costs of negative environmental impact are high. 9. Outline the steps involved in attaining sustainable development in India. 10. India has abundant natural resources —substantiate the statement. 11. Is environmental crisis a recent phenomenon? If so, why? 12. Give two instances of (a) Overuse of environmental resources (b) Misuse of environmental resources. 13. State any four pressing environmental concerns of India. 14. Correction for environmental damages involves opportunity costs — explain. 15. Explain how the supply-demand reversal of environmental resources account for the current environmental crisis. 16. Highlight any two serious adverse environmental consequences of development in India. India’s environmental problems pose a dichotomy — they are poverty induced and, at the same time, due to affluence in living standards — is this true? 17. What is sustainable development? 18. Keeping in view  your locality, describe any four strategies of sustainable development. 19. Explain the relevance of intergenerational equity in the definition of sustainable development. SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES 1. Suppose 70 lakh cars are added every year to the roads of metropolitans. Which type of resources do you think are undergoing depletion? Discuss. 2. Make a list of items that can be recycled. 130 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 2024-25 3. Prepare a chart on the causes and remedies of soil erosion in India. 4. How does population explosion contribute to the environmental crisis? Debate in the classroom. 5. The nation has to pay heavily for correcting environmental damages — discuss. 6. A paper factory is to be set up in your village. Arrange a role play consisting of an activist, an industrialist and a group of villagers. REFERENCES BOOKS AGARWAL, ANIL and SUNITA NARAIN. 1996. Global Warming in an Unequal World. Centre for Science and Environment, Reprint Edition, New Delhi. BHARUCHA, E. 2005. Textbook of Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses, Universities Press (India) Pvt Ltd. CENTRE FOR SCIENCE AND ENVIRONMENT. 1996. State of India’s Environment 1: The First Citizens’ Report 1982. Reprint Edition, New Delhi. CENTRE FOR SCIENCE AND ENVIRONMENT. 1996. State of India’s Environment 2: The Second Citizens’ Report 1985, Reprint Edition, New Delhi. KARPAGAM, M. 2001.Environmental Economics: A Textbook. Sterling Publishers, New Delhi. RAJAGOPALAN, R. 2005. Environmental Studies:  From Crisis to Cure. Oxford University Press, New Delhi. SCHUMACHER, E.F. Small is Beautiful. Abacus Publishers, New York. Reports State of India’s Environment (for various years), Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi. Journals Scientific American, India, Special Issue, September 2005 Down to Earth, Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi. Websites http://envfor.nic.in http://cpcb.nic.in http://www.cseindia.org ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 131 2024-25