NOTES FOR THE TEACHER CHAPTER 3 : MONEY AND CREDIT Money is a fascinating subject and full of a collage of the major areas where people use curiosities. It is important to capture this digital and cash transactions which are element for the students. The history of legitimate and legal. They can also discuss the money and how various forms were used at transactions which are legal and why. It is also different times is an interesting story. At this important to intimate students that different stage the purpose is to allow students to types of plastic cards are used in place of cash realise the social situation in which these transactions but not all of them money per se. forms were used. Modern forms of money are Credit is a crucial element in economic linked to the banking system. This is the life and it is, therefore, important to first central idea of the first part of the chapter. understand this in a conceptual manner. The present situation in India, where What are the aspects that one looks at in newer forms of money are slowly spreading any credit arrangement and how this affects with computerisation of the banking system, people is the main focus of the second part offers many opportunities to students to of the chapter. The world around us offers a explore on their own. We need not get into a tremendous variety of such arrangements formal discussion of the ‘functions of money’ and it would be ideal to explain these but let it come up as questions. There are aspects of credit from situations that are certain areas that are not covered, such as familiar to your students. The other crucial ‘creation of money’ (money multiplier) or the issue of credit is its availability to all, backing of the modern system that may be especially the poor, and on reasonable discussed if you desire. terms. We need to emphasise that this is a As you would see in the chapter, the stock right of the people and without which a large of money consists of currency held by the section of them would be kept out of the public and the demand deposits that they hold development process. There are many with the banks. This is the money that people innovative interventions, such as that of can use as they wish and the government has Grameen Bank, of which students may be to ensure that the system works smoothy. made familiar with but it is important to What would happen when the government realise that we don’t have answers to all declares that some of the currency notes used questions. We need to find new ways and by people would be made invalid and would be this is one of the social challenges that replaced by new currency? In India, during developing countries face. November 2016, currency notes in the Sources for Information denomination of Rs. 500 and Rs. 1,000 were declared invalid. People were asked to The data on formal and informal sector credit surrender these notes to the bank by a specific used in this chapter is drawn from the period and receive new Rs. 500, Rs. 2,000 or survey on rural debt by the National Sample Survey Organisation (All India Debt and other currency notes. This is known as Investment Survey, 70 t h Round 2013, ‘demonetisation’. Since then, people were also conducted by NSSO) now known as National encouraged to use their bank deposits rather Statistical Office (NSO). The information and than cash for transactions. Hence, digital data on Grameen Bank is taken from transactions started by using bank-to-bank newspaper reports and websites. In order transfer through the internet or mobile to get the details of bank-related statistics phones, cheques, ATM cards, credit cards, or a particular detail of a bank, you can log and Point of Sale (POS) swipe machines at on to the websites of the Reserve Bank of shops. This is promoted to reduce the India (www.rbi.org) and the concerned requirement of cash for transactions and also banks. Data on self-help groups is provided control corruption. Students could be asked on the website of the National Bank for to debate on the process and the impact of Agriculture and Rural Development demonetisation. They can be guided to make (NABARD) (www.nabard.org). 38 UNDERSTANDING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 2024-25 CHAPTER 3 MONEY AND CREDIT MONEY AS A MEDIUM OF EXCHANGE The use of money spans a very large difficult it would be if the shoe part of our everyday life. Look around manufacturer had to directly you and you would easily be able to exchange shoes for wheat without the identify several transactions involving use of money. He would have to look money in any single day. Can you for a wheat growing farmer who not I DON’T NEED make a list of these? In many of these only wants to sell wheat SHOES. I NEED I’LL GIVE transactions, goods are being bought CLOTHES. YOU SHOES but also wants to buy the and sold with the use of money. In FOR YOUR shoes in exchange. some of these transactions, services WHEAT. That is, both parties are being exchanged with money.  For have to agree to some, there might not be any actual sell and buy each transfer of money taking place now others commodities. but a promise to pay money later. This is known as double coincidence Have you ever wondered why of wants. What a person transactions are made in desires to sell is exactly what the I WANT SHOES. money? The reason is simple. BUT I DON’T HAVE other wishes to buy. In a barter A person holding money can easily WHEAT. system where goods are directly exchange it for any commodity or exchanged without the use of money, service that he or she might want. double coincidence of wants is an Thus everyone  prefers to receive essential feature. payments in money and then exchange the money for things that In contrast, in an economy where they want.  Take the case of a shoe money is in use, money by providing manufacturer. He wants to sell shoes the crucial intermediate step in the market and buy wheat.  The eliminates the need for double shoe manufacturer will first exchange coincidence of wants. It is no longer shoes that he has produced for necessary for the shoe manufacturer money, and then exchange the money to look for a farmer who will buy his for wheat. Imagine how much more shoes and at the same time sell him MONEY AND CREDIT 39 2024-25 wheat. All he has to do is find a buyer for his shoes. Once he has exchanged his shoes for money, he can purchase wheat or any other commodity in the market. Since money acts as an intermediate in the exchange process, it is called a medium of exchange. LET’S WORK THESE OUT 1. How does the use of money make it easier to exchange things? 2. Can you think of some examples of goods / services being exchanged or wages being paid through barter? MODERN FORMS OF  MONEY We have seen that money is organisation is allowed to issue something that can act as a medium currency. Moreover, the law legalises of exchange in transactions.  Before the use of rupee as a medium of Early punch- the introduction of coins, a variety of payment that cannot be refused in marked coins objects was used as money. For settling transactions in India. No (may be 2500 example, since the very early ages, individual in India can legally refuse years old) Indians used  grains and cattle as a payment made in rupees. Hence, money. Thereafter came the use of the rupee is widely accepted as a metallic coins — gold, silver, copper medium of exchange. coins — a phase which continued well into the last century. Deposits with Banks Gupta The other form in which people hold coins Currency money is as deposits with banks. At Modern forms of money include a point of time, people need only some currency — paper notes and coins. currency  for their day-to-day needs. Unlike the things that were used as For instance, workers who receive money earlier, modern currency is not their salaries at the end of each month made of precious metal such as gold, have extra cash at the beginning of Tughlaq silver and copper.  And unlike grain the month. What do people do with coin and cattle, they are neither of this extra cash? They deposit it with everyday use. The modern currency the banks by opening a bank is without any use of its own. account in their name. Banks accept Gold Mohar the deposits and also pay an amount Then, why is it accepted as a from as interest on the deposits. In this way Akbar’s medium of exchange?  It is accepted reign people’s money is safe with the as a medium of exchange because the banks and it earns an amount as currency is authorised by the interest.  People also have the government of the country. provision to withdraw the money as In India, the Reserve Bank of India and when they require. Since the issues currency notes on behalf of the deposits in the bank accounts can be central government. As per Indian withdrawn on demand, these law, no other individual or deposits are called demand deposits. Modern coin 40 UNDERSTANDING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 2024-25 Demand deposits offer another made by cheques instead of cash. interesting facility. It is this facility For payment through cheque, the which lends i t  the essent ia l payer who has an account with the characteristics of money (that of a bank, makes out a cheque for a medium of exchange). You would specific amount. A cheque is a have heard of payments being paper instructing the bank to pay a speci f ic  amount from the person’s account to the person in LET US TRY AND UNDERSTAND whose name the cheque has been HOW CHEQUE PAYMENTS ARE issued. MADE AND REALISED WITH AN EXAMPLE. Cheque Payments A shoe manufacturer, M. Salim has to make a payment to the leather supplier and writes a cheque for a specific amount. This means that the shoe manufacturer instructs his bank to pay this amount to the leather supplier. The leather supplier takes this cheque, and  deposits it in his own account in the bank. The money is transferred from one bank account to another bank account in a couple of days. The transaction is complete without any payment of cash. Account number Bank branch code Cheque number Coding used by banks Thus we see that demand deposits You must remember the role that share the essential features of money. the banks play here. But for the The facility of cheques against demand banks, there would be no demand deposits makes it possible to directly deposits and no payments by settle payments without the use of cash. cheques against these deposits.  The Since demand deposits are accepted modern forms of money — currency widely as a means of payment, along and deposits — are closely linked to with currency, they constitute money the working of the modern banking in the modern economy. system. MONEY AND CREDIT 41 2024-25 LET’S WORK THESE OUT 1. M. Salim wants to withdraw Rs 20,000 in cash for making payments. How would he write a cheque to withdraw money? 2. Tick the correct answer. After the transaction between Salim and Prem, (i) Salim’s balance in his bank account increases, and Prem’s balance increases. (ii) Salim’s balance in his bank account decreases and Prem’s balance increases. (iii) Salim’s balance in his bank account increases and Prem’s balance decreases. 3. Why are demand deposits considered as money? LOAN ACTIVITIES OF BANKS Let us take the story of banks further. huge demand for loans for various What do the banks do with the economic activities. We shall read more deposits which they accept from the about this in the following sections. public? There is an interesting Banks make use of the deposits to mechanism at work here. Banks keep meet the loan requirements of the only a small proportion of their people.  In this way, banks mediate deposits as cash with themselves.  For between those who have surplus example, banks in India these days funds (the depositors) and those who hold about 15 per cent of their are in need of these funds (the deposits as cash. This is kept as borrowers). Banks charge a higher provision to pay the depositors who interest rate on loans than what they might come to withdraw money from offer on deposits. The difference the bank on any given day. Since, on between what is charged from any particular day, only some of its borrowers and what is paid to many depositors come to withdraw depositors is their main source of cash, the bank is able to manage with income. this cash. What do you think would Banks use the major portion of the  ha if p a p l e l n the depositors went deposits to extend loans.  There is a t f o o r a t s h k eir money at the same time? DEPOSITORS BORROWERS People make People take deposits loans People make People repay withdrawals and loans with get interest interest 42 UNDERSTANDING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 2024-25 TWO DIFFERENT CREDIT SITUATIONS A large number of transactions in our day-to-day activities involve credit in some form or the other. Credit (loan) refers to an agreement in which the lender supplies the borrower with money, goods or services in return for the promise of future payment. Let us see how credit works through the following two examples. (1) Festival Season It is festival season two months from now now and promises to pay him later. and the shoe manufacturer, Salim, has Second, he obtains loan in cash from the received an order from a large trader in large trader as advance payment for town for 3,000 pairs of shoes to be 1000 pairs of shoes with a promise to delivered in a month time. To complete deliver the whole order by the end of the production on time, Salim has to hire a few month. more workers for stitching and pasting At the end of the month, Salim is able to work. He has to purchase the raw deliver the order, make a good profit, and materials. To meet these expenses, Salim repay the money that he had borrowed. obtains loans from two sources. First, he asks the leather supplier to supply leather In this case, Salim obtains credit to meet the working capital needs of production. The credit helps him to meet the ongoing expenses of production, complete production on time, and thereby increase his earnings. Credit therefore plays a vital and positive role in this situation. (2) Swapna’s Problem Swapna, a small farmer, grows groundnut on her three acres of land. She takes a loan from the moneylender to meet the expenses of cultivation, hoping that her harvest would help repay the loan. Midway through the season the crop is hit by pests and the crop fails. Though Swapna sprays  her crops with expensive pesticides, it makes little difference. She is unable to repay the moneylender and the debt grows over the year into a large amount. Next year, Swapna takes a fresh loan for cultivation. It is a normal crop this year. But the earnings are not enough to cover the old loan. She is caught in debt. She has to sell a part of the land to pay off the debt. MONEY AND CREDIT 43 2024-25 In rural areas, the main demand In Swapna’s case, the failure of the for credit is for crop production. Crop crop made loan repayment production involves considerable impossible. She had to sell part of the costs on seeds, fertilisers, pesticides, land to repay the loan. Credit, instead water, electricity, repair of equipment, of helping Swapna improve her etc. There is a minimum stretch of earnings, left her worse off. This is an three to four months between the time example of what is commonly called when the farmers buy these inputs debt-trap. Credit in this case pushes and when they sell the crop. Farmers the borrower into a situation from usually take crop loans at the which recovery is very painful. beginning of the season and repay the In one situation credit helps to loan after harvest. Repayment of the increase earnings and therefore the loan is crucially dependent on the person is better off than before. In income from farming. another situation, because of the crop failure, credit LET’S WORK THESE OUT pushes the person into a debt trap. To repay 1. Fill the following table. her loan she has to sell a portion of her land. Salim Swapna She is clearly much Why did they need credit? worse off than before. What was the risk? Whether credit would What was the outcome? be useful or not, therefore, depends 2. Supposing Salim continues to get orders from traders. What would be on the risks in the his position after 6 years? situation and whether 3. What are the reasons that make Swapna’s situation so risky? Discuss there is some support, factors – pesticides; role of moneylenders; climate. in case of loss. TERMS OF CREDIT Every loan agreement specifies an repayment of the principal. In interest rate which the borrower must addition, lenders may demand pay to the lender along with the collateral (security) against loans. Collateral is an asset that the borrower owns (such as land, building, vehicle, livestocks, deposits with banks) and  uses this as a guarantee to a lender until the loan is repaid. If the borrower fails to repay the loan, the lender has the right to sell the asset or collateral to obtain payment. Property such as land titles, deposits with banks, livestock are some common examples of collateral used for borrowing. 2024-25 A House Loan Megha has taken a loan of Rs 5 lakhs from the bank  to purchase a house. The annual interest rate on the loan is 12 per cent and the loan is to be repaid in 10 years in monthly instalments. Megha had to submit to the bank, documents showing her employment records and salary before the bank agreed to give her the loan. The bank retained as collateral the papers of the new house, which will be returned to Megha only when she repays the entire loan with interest. Fill the following details of Megha’s housing loan. Loan amount (in Rupees) Duration of loan Documents required Interest rate Mode of repayment Collateral Interest rate, collateral and documentation requirement, and the mode of repayment together comprise what is called the terms of credit. The terms of credit vary substantially from one credit arrangement to another. They may vary depending on the nature of the lender and the borrower. The next section will provide examples of the varying terms of credit in different credit arrangements. LET’S WORK THESE OUT 1. Why do lenders ask for collateral while lending? 2. Given that a large number of people in our country are poor, does it in any way affect their capacity to borrow? 3. Fill in the blanks choosing the correct option from the brackets. While taking a loan, borrowers look for easy terms of credit. This means __________ (low/high) interest rate, ______________(easy/ tough) conditions for repayment, ___________(less/more) collateral and documentation requirements. MONEY AND CREDIT 45 2024-25 Variety of Credit Arrangements Example of a Village Rohit and Ranjan had finished reading about the terms of credit in class. They were eager to know the various credit arrangements that existed in their area: who were the people who provided credit? Who were the borrowers? What were the terms of credit? They decided to talk to some people in their village.  Read what they record... 15th Nov, 2019. most farmers and he fields where ay. The fields We head directly for t is time of the d be working at th al, a small labourers would first meet Shyam otato crops. We are planted with p illage. mall irrigated v farmer in Sonpur, a s We next meet Arun who is supervising the work of one farm labourer. Arun has seven Shyamal tells us that every season he needs acres of land. He is one of the few persons loans for cultivation on his 1.5 acres of land. Till in Sonpur to receive bank loan for a few years back, he would borrow money from cultivation. The interest rate on the  loan the village moneylender at an interest rate of is 8.5 per cent per annum, and can be repaid five per cent per month (60% per annum). anytime in the next three years.  Arun plans For the last few years, Shyamal has been to repay the loan after harvest by selling a borrowing from an agricultural trader in the part of the crop. He then intends to store village at an interest rate of three per cent the rest of the potatoes in a cold storage per month. At the beginning of the cropping and  apply for a fresh loan from the bank season, the trader supplies the farm inputs on against the cold storage receipt. The bank credit, which is  to be repaid when the crops offers this facility to farmers who have are ready for harvest. taken crop loan from them. Besides the interest charge on the loan, the trader also makes the farmers promise to Rama is working in a neighbouring field. She sell the crop to him. This way the trader works as an agricultural lab n ensure that the money is repaid s o e u v r e e r r a . l T h ca m e o r n e t a h r s e in the year promptly. Also, since the crop prices are low n w o h e w n o r R k a , m an a d  h n a e s eds credit to  d after the harvest, the trader is able to e x m pe e n et s e t s h . e Ex a p i e ly nses on sudd make a profit from buying the crop at a low fu e n n c t il i l o n n es s s in e s t h o e r family are a l l o s a o n m s. e t R a t m hr ug rice from the farmers and then selling it a o p  ha h s to depend o er ter when the price has risen. a n m  h la edi e u m m p l l o a y n e d r o , wner in Son T p h u e r , l a f n o d r o c w r n e e d r it c . harges an i 5 nt p er e e r s t c e r n a t t e p e o r f month. Ra m m o a n e r y e p b a y y s w o t r h k e ing for the la o n f d t o h w e n t e im r. e M , R os a t ma has to ta b k e e f o a r e fr e t s h h e l p oa re n v , ious loan ha A s t b p e r e e n s  r e e n p t a , i d s . he owes t R h s e 5 l , a 0 n 0 d 0 o . w T n h e o r ugh the lan t d r o e w a n t e h r e  d r o w e e s ll n , s ’t he continues s  t in o c  w e o s r h k e f o c r a  h n im get loans fro n m ee d h . i m Ra  w m h a e n t e i l n ls us that th c e r  o ed nl i y t s fo o r u r t c h e e o la f ndless peop t le h e in l S an o d n o p w ur n e a r r - e employers. 2024-25 Loans from Cooperatives Besides banks, the other major source of cheap credit in rural areas are the cooperative societies (or cooperatives).  Members of a cooperative pool their resources for cooperation in certain areas. There are several types of cooperatives possible such as farmers cooperatives, weavers cooperatives, industrial workers cooperatives, etc. Krishak Cooperative functions in a village not very far away from Sonpur. It has 2300 farmers as members. It accepts deposits from its members. With these deposits as collateral, the Cooperative has obtained a large loan from the bank. These funds are used to provide loans to members. Once these loans are repaid, another round of lending can take place. Krishak Cooperative provides loans for the purchase of agricultural implements, loans for cultivation and agricultural trade, fishery loans, loans for construction of houses and for a variety of other expenses. LET’S WORK THESE OUT 1. List the various sources of credit in Sonpur. 2. Underline the various uses of credit in Sonpur in the above passages. 3. Compare the terms of credit for the small farmer, the medium farmer and the landless agricultural worker in Sonpur. 4. Why will Arun have a higher income from cultivation compared to Shyamal? 5. Can everyone in Sonpur get credit at a cheap rate? Who are the people who can? 6. Tick the correct answer. (i) Over the years, Rama’s debt · will rise. · will remain constant. · will decline. (ii) Arun is one of the few people in Sonpur to take a bank loan because · other people in the village prefer to borrow from the moneylenders. · banks demand collateral which everyone cannot provide. · interest rate on bank loans is same as the interest rate charged by the traders. 7. Talk to some people to find out the credit arrangements that exist in your area. Record your conversation. Note the differences in the terms of credit across people. MONEY AND CREDIT 47 2024-25 FORMAL SECTOR CREDIT IN INDIA We have seen in the above examples that Graph 1 : Sources of Credit in Rural India, 2019 people obtain loans from various sources. The Other Informal various types of loans Agencies, 3% can be conveniently Relatives and Friends, 7% grouped as formal sector loans and informal sector loans. Among the former Moneylenders, Commercial are loans from banks 23% Banks, 51% and cooperatives. The informal lenders include Landlords, 1% moneylenders, traders, employers, relatives and Other Formal Agencies, 5% friends, etc.  In Graph 1 Cooperative Banks you can see the various and Society, 10% sources of credit to rural households in India. Is more credit the RBI sees that the banks give loans coming from the formal sector or the not just to profit-making businesses informal sector? and traders but also to small cultivators, small scale industries, to The Reserve Bank of India small borrowers etc. Periodically, supervises the functioning of formal banks have to submit information to sources of loans.  For instance, we the RBI on how much they are have seen that the banks maintain a lending, to whom, at what interest minimum cash balance out of the rate, etc.