Accounting for Share Capital 1 A company form of organisation is the third stage in the evolution of forms of organisation. Its capital is contributed by a large number of persons called shareholders who are the real owners of the LEARNING OBJECTIVES company. But neither it is possible for all of them to After studying this chapter, participate in the management of the company nor you will be able to : considered desirable. Therefore, they elect a Board • explain the basic nature of Directors as their representative to manage the of a joint stock company affairs of the company. In fact, all the affairs of the as a form of business company are governed by the provisions of the organisation and the various kinds of Companies Act, 2013. A company means a company companies based on incorporated or registered under the Companies Act, liability of their 2013 or under any other earlier Companies Acts. members; According to Chief Justice Marshal, “a company is • describe the types of a person, artificial, invisible, intangible and existing shares issued by a only in the eyes of law. Being a mere creation of law, company; • explain the accounting it possesses only those properties which the charter treatment of shares of its creation confers upon it, either expressly or as issued at par, at incidental to its very existence”. premium and at A company usually raises its capital in the form of discount including shares (called share capital) and debentures (debt oversubsription; capital.) This chapter deals with the accounting for • outline the accounting for  forfeiture of shares share capital of companies. and reissue of forfeited shares under varying 1.1 Features of a Company situations; • workout the amounts to A company may be viewed as an association of be transferred to capital person who contribute money or money’s worth to reserve when forfeited a common inventory and use it for a common shares are reissued; and purpose. It is an artificial person having  corporate prepare share forfeited legal entity distinct from its members (shareholders) account ; and has a common seal used for its signature. Thus, 2024-25 2 Accountancy : Company Accounts and Analysis of Financial Statements it has certain special features which distinguish it from the other forms of organisation. These are as follows: • Body Corporate: A company is formed according to the provisions of Law enforced from time to time. Generally, in India, the companies are formed and registered under Companies Law except in the case of Banking and Insurance companies for which a separate Law is provided for. • Separate Legal Entity: A company has a separate legal entity which is distinct and separate from its members. It can hold and deal with any type of property. It can enter into contracts and even open a bank account in its own name. • Limited Liability: The liability of the members of the company is limited to the extent of unpaid amount of the shares held by them. In the case of the companies limited by guarantee, the liability of its members is limited to the extent of the guarantee given by them in the event of the company being wound up. • Perpetual Succession: The company being an artificial person created by law continues to exist irrespective of the changes in its membership. A company can be terminated only through law. The death or insanity or insolvency of any member of the company in no way affects the existence of the company. Members may come and go but the company continues. • Common Seal: The company being an artificial person, cannot sign its name by itself. Therefore, every company is required to have its own seal which acts as official signatures of the company. Any document which does not carry the common seal of the company is not binding on the company. • Transferability of Shares: The shares of a public limited company are freely transferable. The permission of the company or the consent of any member of the company is not necessary for the transfer of shares. But the Articles of the company can prescribe the manner in which the transfer of shares will be made. • May Sue or be Sued: A company being a legal person can enter into contracts and can enforce the contractual rights against others. It can sue and be sued in its name if there is a breach of contract by the company. 1.2 Kinds of Companies Companies can be classified either on the basis of the liability of its members or on the basis of the number of members. On the basis of liability of its members the companies can be classified into the following three categories: (i) Companies Limited by Shares: In this case, the liability of its members is limited to the extent of the nominal value of shares held by them. If a member has paid the full amount of the shares, there is no liability on his part whatsoever may be for the debts of the company. He need not pay a single paise from his private property. However, if there is 2024-25 Accounting for Share Capital 3 any liability involved, it can be enforced during the existence of the company as well as during the winding up. (ii) Companies Limited by Guarantee: In this case, the liability of its members is limited to the amount they undertake to contribute in the event of the company being wound up. Thus, the liability of the members will arise only in the event of its winding up. (iii) Unlimited Companies: When there is no limit on the liability of its members, the company is called an unlimited company. When the company’s property is not sufficient to pay off its debts, the private property of its members can be used for the purpose. In other words, the creditors can claim their dues from its members. Such companies are not found in India even though permitted by the Companies Act. On the basis of the number of members, companies can be divided into three categories as follows: (i) Public Company: A public company means a company which (a) is not a private company; (b) is a company which is not a subsidiary of a private company. (ii) Private Company: A private company is one which by its articles of association: (a) Restricts the right to transfer its shares; (b) A private company must have at least 2 persons, except in case of one person company; (c) Limits the number of its members to 200 (excluding its employees); (iii) One Person Company (OPC): Sec. 2 (62) of the companies Act, 2013, defines OPC as a “company which has only one person as a member”. Rule 3 of the Companies (Incorporation) Rules, 2014 provides that: (a) Only a natural person being an Indian citizen and resident in India can form one person company, (b) It cannot carry out non-banking financial investment activities. (c) Its paid up share capital is not more than Rs. 50 Lakhs (d) Its average annual turnover of three years does not exceed Rs. 2 Crores. 1.3 Share Capital of a Company A company, being an artificial person, cannot generate its own capital which has necessarily to be collected from several persons. These persons are known as shareholders and the amount contributed by them is called share capital. Since the number of shareholders is very very large, a separate capital account cannot be opened for each one of them. Hence, innumerable streams of capital contribution merge their identities in a common capital account called as ‘Share Capital Account’. 2024-25 4 Accountancy : Company Accounts and Analysis of Financial Statements 1.3.1 Categories of Share Capital From accounting point of view the share capital of the company can be classified as follows: • Authorised Capital: Authorised capital is the amount of share capital which a company is authorised to issue by its Memorandum of Association. The company cannot raise more than the amount of capital as specified in the Memorandum of Association. It is also called Nominal or Registered capital. The authorised capital can be increased or decreased as per the procedure laid down in the Companies Act. It should be noted that the company need not issue the entire authorised capital for public subscription at a time. Depending upon its requirement, it may issue share capital but in any case, it should not be more than the amount of authorised capital. • Issued Capital: It is that part of the authorised capital which is actually issued to the public for subscription including the shares allotted to vendors and the signatories to the company’s memorandum. The authorised capital which is not offered for public subscription is known as ‘unissued capital’. Unissued capital may be offered for public subscription at a later date. • Subscribed Capital: It is that part of the issued capital which has been actually subscribed by the public. When the shares offered for public subscription are subscribed fully by the public the issued capital and subscribed capital would be the same. It may be noted that ultimately, the subscribed capital may be equal to or less than issued capital. In case the number of shares subscribed is less than what is offered, the company allots only the number of shares for which subscription has been received. In case it is higher than what is offered, the allotment will be equal to the offer. In other words, the fact of over subscription is not reflected in the books. • Called up Capital: It is that part of the subscribed capital which has been called up on the shares, i.e., what the company has asked the shareholders to pay. The company may decide to call the entire amount or part of the face value of the shares, For example, if the face value (also called nominal value) of a share allotted is Rs. 10 and the company has called up only Rs. 7 per share, in that scenario, the called up capital is Rs. 7 per share. The remaining Rs. 3 may be collected from its shareholders as and when needed. • Paid up Capital: It is that portion of the called up capital which has been actually received from the shareholders. When the shareholders have paid all the called amount, the called up capital is the same to the paid up capital. If any of the shareholders has not paid amount on calls, such an amount may be called as ‘calls in arrears’. Therefore, paid up capital is equal to the called-up capital minus call in arrears. • Uncalled Capital: That portion of the subscribed capital which has not yet been called up. As stated earlier, the company may collect this amount any time when it needs further funds. 2024-25 Accounting for Share Capital 5 • Reserve Capital: A company may reserve a portion of its uncalled capital to be called only in the event of winding up of the company. Such uncalled amount is called ‘Reserve Capital’ of the company. It is available only for the creditors on winding up of the company. Authorised Share Capital Issued Capital  Unissued Capital Subscribed Capital Subscribed and Fully Paid up Subscribed but not Fully Paid up Exhibit. 1.1 : Categories of Share Capital Let us take the following example and show how the share capital will be shown in the balance sheet. Sunrise Company Ltd., New Delhi, has registered its capital as Rs. 40,00,000, divided into 4,00,000 shares of Rs. 10 each. The company offered to the public for subscription of 2,00,000 shares of Rs. 10 each, to be received as Rs. 2 on application, Rs.3 on allotment, Rs.3 on first call and the balance on final call. The company received applications for 2,50,000 shares. The company finalised the allotment of 2,00,000 shares and rejected applications for 50,000 shares. The company did not make the final call. The company received all the amount except on 2,000 shares where call money has not been received. The above amounts will be shown in the Notes to Accounts of the balance sheet of Sunrise Company Ltd. as follows: Notes to Accounts Share Capital (Rs.) Authorised or Registered or Nominal Capital: 4,00,000 Shares of Rs. 10 each 40,00,000 Issued Capital 2,00,000 Shares of Rs. 10 each 20,00,000 Subscribed Capital Subscribed but not fully paid up 2,00,000 Shares of Rs. 10 each, Rs. 8 called up 16,00,000 Less :  Calls in Arrears (6,000) 15,94,000 2024-25 6 Accountancy : Company Accounts and Analysis of Financial Statements 1.4 Nature and Classes of Shares Shares, refer to the units into which the total share capital of a company is divided. Thus, a share is a fractional part of the share capital and forms the basis of ownership interest in a company. The persons who contribute money through shares are called shareholders. The amount of authorised capital, together with the number of shares in which it is divided, is stated in the Memorandum of Association but the classes of shares in which the company’s capital is to be divided, along with their respective rights and obligations, are prescribed by the Articles of Association of the company. As per The Companies Act, a company can issue two types of shares (1) preference shares, and (2) equity shares (also called ordinary shares). 1.4.1 Preference Shares According to Section 43 of The Companies Act, 2013, a preference share is one, which fulfils the following conditions : (a) That it carries a preferential right to dividend to be paid either as a fixed amount payable to preference shareholders or an amount calculated by a fixed rate of the nominal value of each share before any dividend is paid to the equity shareholders. (b) That with respect to capital it carries or will carry, on the winding up of the company, the preferential right to the repayment of capital before anything is paid to equity shareholders. However, notwithstanding the above two conditions, a holder of the preference share may have a right to participate fully or to a limited extent in the surpluses of the company as specified in the Memorandum or Articles of the company. Thus, the preference shares can be participating and nonparticipating. Similarly, these shares can be cumulative or non-cumulative, and redeemable or irredeemable. 1.4.2 Equity Shares According to Section 43 of The Companies Act, 2013, an equity share is a share which is not a preference share. In other words, shares which do not enjoy any preferential right in the payment of dividend or repayment of capital, are termed as equity/ordinary shares. The equity shareholders are entitled to share the distributable profits of the company after satisfying the dividend rights of the preference share holders. The dividend on equity shares is not fixed and it may vary from year to year depending upon the amount of profits available 2024-25 Accounting for Share Capital 7 for distribution. The equity share capital may be (i) with voting rights; or (ii) with differential rights as to voting, dividend or otherwise in accordance with such rules and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed in the Articles of Association of the company. Test your Understanding – I State which of the following statements are true : (a) A company is an artificial person. (b) Shareholders of a company are liable for the acts of the company. (c) Every member of a company is entitled to take part in its management. (d) Company’s shares are generally transferable. (e) Share application account is a personal account. (f) The director of a company must be a shareholder. (g) Paid up capital can exceed called up capital. (h) Capital reserves are created from capital profits. (i) At the time of issue of shares, the maximum rate of securities premium is 10%. (j) The part of capital which is called up only on winding up is called reserve capital. 1.5 Issue of Shares A salient characteristic of the capital of a company is that the amount on its shares can be gradually collected in easy instalments spread over a period of time depending upon its growing financial requirement. The first instalment is collected along with application and is thus, known as application money, the second on allotment (termed as allotment money), and the remaining instalments are termed as first call, second call and so on. The word final is suffixed to the last instalment. However, this in no way which prevents a company from calling the full amount on shares right at the time of application. The important steps in the procedure of share issue are : • Issue of Prospectus: The company first issues the prospectus to the public. Prospectus is an invitation to the public that a new company has come into existence and it needs funds for doing business. It contains complete information about the company and the manner in which the money is to be collected from the prospective investors. • Receipt of Applications: When prospectus is issued to the public, prospective investors intending to subscribe the share capital of the company would make an application along with the application money 2024-25 8 Accountancy : Company Accounts and Analysis of Financial Statements and deposit the same with a scheduled bank as specified in the prospectus. The company has to get minimum subscription  within 120 days from the date of the issue of the prospectus. If the company fails to receive the same within the said period, the company cannot proceed for the allotment of shares and application money should be returned within 130 days of the date of issue of prospectus. • Allotment of Shares: If minimum subscription has been received, the company may proceed for the allotment of shares after fulfilling certain other legal formalities. Letters of allotment are sent to those whom the shares have been alloted, and letters of regret to those to whom no allotment has been made. When allotment is made, it results in a valid contract between the company and the applicants who now became the shareholders of the company. Minimum Subscription The minimum amount that, in the opinion of directors, must be raised to meet the needs of business operations of the company relating to:  the price of any property purchased, or to be purchased, which has to be met wholly or partly out of the proceeds of issue;  preliminary expenses payable by the company and any commission payable in connection with the issue of shares;  the repayment of any money borrowed by the company for the above two matters;  working capital; and  any other expenditure required for the usual conduct of business operations. It is to be noted that ‘minimum subscription’ of capital cannot be less than 90% of the issued amount according to SEBI (Disclosure and Investor Protection) Guidelines, 2000 [6.3.8.1 and 6.3.8.2]. If this condition is not satisfied, the company shall forthwith refund the entire subscription amount received. If a delay occurs beyond 8 days from the date of closure of subscription list, the company shall be liable to pay the amount with interest at the rate of 15% [Section 73(2)]. Shares of a company are issued either at par or at a premium. Shares are  to be issued at par when their issue price is exactly equal to their nominal value according to the terms and conditions of issue. When the shares of a company are issued more than its nominal value (face value), the excess amount is called premium. 2024-25 Accounting for Share Capital 9 Irrespective of the fact that shares are issued at par or at a premium, the share capital of a company as stated earlier, may be collected in instalments payable at different stages. 1.6 Accounting Treatment On application : The amount of money paid with various instalment represents the contribution to share capital and should ultimately be credited to share capital. However, for the sake of convenience, initially individual accounts are opened for each instalment. All money received along with application is deposited with a scheduled bank in a separate account opened for the purpose. The journal entry is as follows: Bank A/c Dr. To Share Application A/c (Amount received on application for — shares @ Rs. ______ per share) On allotment : When minimum subscription has been received and certain legal formalities on the allotment of shares have been duly compiled with, the directors of the company proceed to make the allotment of shares. The allotment of shares implies a contract between the company and the applicants who now become the allottees and assume the status of shareholders or members. Allotment of Shares (Implications from accounting point of view)  It is customary to ask for some amount called “Allotment Money” from the allottees on the shares allotted to them as soon as the allotment is made.  With the acceptance to the offer made by the applicants, the amount of application money received has to be transferred to share capital account as it has formally become the part of the same.  The money received on rejected applications should be fully returned to the applicant within period prescribed by law/SEBI.  In case lesser number of shares have to be allotted, than those applied for the excess application money must be adjusted towards the amount due on allotment from the allottees.  The effect of the later two steps is to close the share application account which is only a temporary account for share capital transactions. 2024-25 10 Accountancy : Company Accounts and Analysis of Financial Statements The journal entries with regard to allotment of shares are as follows: 1. For Transfer of Application Money Share Application A/c Dr. To Share Capital A/c (Application money on _____ Shares allotted/ transferred to Share Capital) 2. For Money Refunded on Rejected Application Share Application A/c Dr. To Bank A/c (Application money returned on rejected application for ___shares) 3. For Amount Due on Allotment Share Allotment A/c Dr. To Share Capital A/c 4. For Adjustment of Excess Application Money Share Application A/c Dr. To Share Allotment A/c (Application Money on __Shares @ Rs__per shares adjusted to the amount due on allotment). 5. For Receipt of Allotment Money Bank A/c Dr. To Share Allotment A/c (Allotment money received on ___Shares @ Rs. — per share Combined Account) Note:- The journal entries (2) and (4) can also be combined as follows: Share Application A/c To Share Allotment A/c To Bank A/c (Excess application money adjusted to share allotment and balance refunded) Sometimes a combined account for share application and share allotment called ‘Share Application and Allotment Account’ is opened in the books of a company. The combined account is based on the reasoning that allotment without application is impossible while application without allotment is meaningless. These two stages of share capital are closely inter-related. When a combined account is maintained, journal entries are recorded in the following manner: 2024-25 Accounting for Share Capital 11 1. For Receipt of Application and Allotment Bank A/c Dr. To Share Application and Allotment A/c (Money received on applications for shares @ Rs. _____ per share). 2. For Transfer of Application Money and Allotment Amount Due Share Application and Allotment A/c Dr. To Share Capital A/c (Transfer of application money to Share Capital Account for amount due or allotment of — Share @ Rs. _____ per share) 3. For Money Refunded on Rejected Applications Share Application and Allotment A/c Dr. To Bank A/c (Application money returned on rejected application for ___ shares) 4. On Receipt of Allotment Amount Bank A/c Dr. To Share Application and Allotment A/c (Balance of Allotment Money Received) Applications Supported by Blocked Amount (ASBA) Initial Public Offers and Rights Issues etc. of securities (Shares, Debentures or Other Financial Instruments) may be subscribed by paying Application Money by a banking instrument (Cheque, Pay order / Draft, Debit to Bank Account or through Applications Supported Blocked Amount (ASBA). ASBA is one of the methods for payment of Application Money. ASBA is a process developed by Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)to apply for subscribing to IPOs and Rights Issue etc. of securities. Under the method, the applicant authorises the bank to block the bank account for the application money, for subscribing the issue. The Bank debits the applicant’s account with application money only if he / she is allotted securities (Shares / Debentures etc.) for the amount payable on allotted securities. In case, securities are not allotted, the bank removes the block (lien) on the amount. Under ASBA based applications, Application Amount payable on the securities applied is blocked by the bank i.e., it marks a lien on amount payable as Application Money on Securities applied. After the company has allotted securities, bank debits the applicant’s bank account by the amount payable on allotted securities and remove the lien on the balance amount. 2024-25 12 Accountancy : Company Accounts and Analysis of Financial Statements On Calls :  Calls play a vital role in making shares fully paid-up and for realising the full amount of shares from the shareholders. In the event of shares not being fully called up till the completion of allotment, the directors have the authority to ask for the remaining amount on shares as and when they decide about the same. It is also possible that the timing of the payment of calls by the shareholders is determined at the time of share issue itself and given in the prospectus. Two points are important regarding the calls on shares. First, the amount on any call should not exceed 25% of the face value of shares. Second, there must be an interval of at least one month between the making of two calls unless otherwise provided by the articles of association of the company. When a call is made and the amount of the same is received, the journal entries are as given below: 1. For Call Amount Due Share Call A/c Dr. To Share Capital A/c (Call money due on ___Shares @ Rs. ____ per share) 2. For Receipt of Call Amount Bank A/c Dr. To Share Call A/c (Call money received) The word/words First, Second, or Third must be added between the words “Share” and ‘Call’ in the Share Call account depending upon the identity of the call made. For example, in case of first call it will be termed as ‘Share First Call Account’, in case of second call it will be ‘Share Second Call Account’ and so on. Another point to be noted is that the words ‘and Final’ will also be added to the last call, say, if second call is the last call it will be termed as ‘Second and Final Call’ and if it is the third call which is the last call, it will be termed as ‘Third and Final Call’. It is also possible that the whole balance after allotment may be collected in one call only. In that case the first call itself, shall be termed as the ‘First and Final Call’. The following points should be kept in mind while issuing the share capital for public subscription : 1. The application money should be at least 5% of the face value of the share. 2. Calls are to be made as per the provisions of the articles of association. 3. Where there is no articles of association of its own, the following provisions of Table A will apply: (a) A period of one month must elapse between two calls; (b) The amount of call should not exceed 25% of the face value of the share; 2024-25 Accounting for Share Capital 13 (c) A minimum of 14 days’ notice is given to the shareholders to pay the amount; and (d) Calls must be made on a uniform basis on all shares within the same class. 4. The procedure for accounting for the issue of both equity and preference shares is the same. To differentiate between the two the words ‘Equity’ and ‘Preference’ is prefixed to each and every instalment. Illustration 1 Mona Earth Mover Limited  decided to issue 12,000 shares of Rs.100 each payable at Rs.30 on application, Rs.40 on allotment, Rs.20 on first call and balance on second and final call. Applications were received for 13,000 shares. The directors decided to reject application of 1,000 shares and their application money being refunded in full. The allotment money was duly received on all the shares, and all sums due on  calls are received except on 100 shares. Record the  transactions in the books of Mona Earth Movers Limited Solution Books of Mona Earth Mover Limited Journal Date Particulars L.F. Debit Credit Amount Amount (Rs.) (Rs.) Bank A/c Dr. 3,90,000 To Share Application A/c 3,90,000 (Application money on 13,000 shares @ Rs.30 per share received) Share Application A/c Dr. 3,60,000 To Share Capital A/c 3,60,000 (Application money transferred to share capital) Share Application A/c Dr. 30,000 To  Bank A/c 30,000 (Application money on 1,000 shares returned] Share Allotment A/c Dr. 4,80,000 To Share Capital A/c 4,80,000 (Money due on allotment of 12,000 shares @ Rs. 40 per share) 2024-25 14 Accountancy : Company Accounts and Analysis of Financial Statements Bank A/c Dr. 4,80,000 To Share Allotment A/c 4,80,000 (Money received on 12,000 shares @ Rs. 40 per share on allotment) Share First Call A/c Dr. 2,40,000 To Share Capital A/c 2,40,000 (Money due on 12,000 shares @ Rs. 20 per share on first Call) Bank A/c Dr. 2,38,000 To Share First Call A/c 2,38,000 (First Call money received except for 100 shares) Share Second and Final  Call A/c Dr. 1,20,000 To Share Capital A/c 1,20,000 (Money due on 12,000 shares @ Rs. 10 per share on Second and final Call ) Bank A/c Dr. 1,19,000 To Share Second and Final Call A/c 1,19,000 (Second and final call money received except for 100 shares) Illustration 2 Eastern Company Limited issued 40,000 shares of Rs. 10 each to the public for the subscription out of its share capital, payable as Rs. 4 on application, Rs. 3 on allotment and the balance on Ist and final call. Applications were received for 40,000 shares. The company made the allotment to the applicants in full. All the amounts due on allotment and first and final call were duly received. Give the journal entries in the books of the company. Solution Books of Eastern Company Limited Journal Date Particulars L.F. Debit Credit Amount Amount (Rs.) (Rs.) Bank A/c Dr. 1,60,000 To Share Application A/c 1,60,000 (Application money on 40,000 shares @ Rs.4 per share received) 2024-25 Accounting for Share Capital 15 Share Application A/c Dr. 1,60,000 To Share Capital A/c 1,60,000 (Application money transferred to share capital) Share Allotment A/c Dr. 1,20,000 To Share Capital A/c 1,20,000 (Money due on allotment of 40,000 shares @ Rs. 3 per share) Bank A/c Dr. 1,20,000 To Share allotment A/c 1,20,000 (Money received on 40,000 shares @ Rs. 3 per share on allotment) Share First and Final Call A/c Dr. 1,20,000 To Share Capital A/c 1,20,000 (Money due on 40,000 shares @ Rs. 3 per share on First and final call) Bank A/c Dr. 1,20,000 To Share First and Final Call A/c 1,20,000 (First and final call money received) Do it Yourself 1. On April 01, 2019, a limited company was incorporated with an authorised capital of Rs. 40,000 divided into shares of Rs. 10 each. It offered to the public for subscription of 3,000 shares payable as follows: On Application Rs. 3 per share On Allotment Rs. 2 per share On First Call (One month after allotment) Rs. 2.50 per share On Second and Final Call Rs. 2.50 per share The shares were fully subscribed for by the public and application money duly received on April 15, 2019. The directors made the allotment on May 1, 2015. How will you record the share capital transactions in the books of a company if the amounts due have been duly received, and the company maintains the combined account for application and allotment. 2. Harsha Ltd., was registered with authorised capital of Rs. 25,00,000 divided into 2,50,000 Equity Shares of Rs. 10 each. Promoters of the company had undertaken to subscribe 25,000 Equity Shares of Rs. 10 each once the company was incorporated. The amount was paid by the subscribers and received by the company. The company later issued at par 2,00,000 shares to public for subscription. It received applications for 1,80.000 Equity Shares both through ASBA and physical mode. Shares were allotted to all the applicants. Determine the Authorised Share Capital, Issued Share Capital and Subscribed Share Capital of the Harsha Ltd. 2024-25 16 Accountancy : Company Accounts and Analysis of Financial Statements 1.6.1 Calls in Arrears It may happen that shareholders do not pay the call amount on due date. When any shareholder fails to pay the amount due on allotment or on any of the calls, such amount is known as ‘Calls in Arrears’/‘Unpaid Calls’. Calls in Arrears represent the debit balance of all the calls account. Such amount shall appear as ‘Note to Accounts (Refer Chapter 3). However, where a company maintains ‘Calls in Arrears’ Account, it needs to pass the following additional journal entry: Calls in Arrears A/c Dr. To Share First Call Account A/c To Share Second and Final Call Account A/c (Calls in arrears brought into account) The Articles of Association of a company may empower the directors to charge interest at a stipulated rate on calls in arrears. If the articles are silent in this regard, the rule contained in Table F shall be applicable which states that the interest at a rate not exceeding 10% p.a. shall have to be paid on all unpaid amounts on shares for the period intervening between the day fixed for payment and the time of actual payment thereof. On receipt of the call amount together with interest, the amount of interest shall be credited to interest account while call money shall be credited to the respective call account or to calls in arrears account. When the shareholder makes the payment of calls in arrears together with interest, the entry will be as follows: Bank A/c Dr. To Calls in Arrears A/c To Interest on Calls in Arrears A/c (Calls in arrears received with interest) Note: If nothing is specified, there is no need to take the interest on calls in arrears account and record the above entry Illustration 3 Cronic Limited issued 10,000 equity shares of Rs. 10 each payable at Rs. 2.50 on application, Rs. 3 on allotment, Rs. 2 on first call, and the balance of Rs. 2.50 on second and final call. All the shares were fully subscribed and paid except of a shareholder having 100 shares who could not pay for second and final call. Give journal entries to record these transactions. 2024-25 Accounting for Share Capital 17 Solution: Books of Cronic Limited Journal Date Particulars L.F. Debit Credit Amount Amount (Rs.) (Rs.) Bank A/c Dr. 25,000 To Equity Share Application A/c 25,000 (Money received on applications for 10,000 shares @ Rs. 2.50 per share) Equity Share Application A/c Dr. 25,000 To Equity Share Capital A/c 25,000 (Transfer of application money on 10,000 shares to share capital) Equity Share Allotment A/c Dr. 30,000 To Equity Share Capital A/c 30,000 (Amount due on the allotment of 10,000 shares @ Rs. 3 per share) Bank A/c Dr. 30,000 To Equity Share Allotment A/c 30,000 (Allotment money received) Share First Call A/c Dr. 20,000 To Equity Share Capital A/c 20,000 (First call money due on 10,000 shares @ Rs. 2 per share) Bank A/c Dr. 20,000 To Equity Share First Call A/c 20,000 (First call money received) Share Second and Final Call A/c Dr. 25,000 To Equity Share Capital A/c 25,000 (Final call money due) Bank A/c Dr. 24,750 Call in Arrears A/c Dr. 250 To Equity Share Second and Final Call A/c 25,000 (Final call money received except that of 100 shares) 2024-25 18 Accountancy : Company Accounts and Analysis of Financial Statements 1.6.2 Calls in Advance Sometimes shareholders pay a part or the whole of the amount of the calls not yet made. The amount so received from the shareholders is known as “Calls in Advance”. The amount received in advance is a liability of the company and should be credited to ‘Call in Advance Account.” The amount received will be adjusted towards the payment of calls as and when they becomes due. Table F of the Companies Act provides for the payment of interest on calls in advance at a rate not exceeding 12% per annum. The following journal entry is recorded for the amount of calls received in advance. Bank A/c Dr. To Calls in Advance A/c (Amount received on call in advance) On the due date of the calls, the amount of ‘Calls in Advance’ is adjusted by the following entry : Calls in Advance A/c Dr. To Particular Call A/c (Calls in advance adjusted with the call money due) The balance in ‘Calls in Advance’ account is shown as a separate item under the title Equity and Liabilities in the company’s balance sheet under the head ‘current liabilities’, as sub-head ‘others current liabilities’. It is not added to the amount of paid-up capital. As ‘Calls in Advance’ is a liability of the company, it is under obligation, if provided by the Articles, to pay interest on such amount from the date of its receipt up to the date when appropriate call is due for payment. A stipulation is generally made in the Articles regarding the rate at which interest is payable. However, if Articles are silent on this account, Table F is applicable which provides for interest on calls in advance at a rate not exceeding 12% per annum. The accounting treatment of interest on Calls in Advance is as follows: 1. For Payment of Interest Interest on Calls in Advance A/c Dr. To Bank A/c (Interest paid on Calls in Advance) OR 2. (a) For Interest due Interest on Calls in Advance A/c Dr. To Sundry Shareholder’s A/c (Interest paid on Calls in Advance) 2. (b) For Interest Paid Sundry Shareholder’s A/c Dr. To Bank A/c 2024-25 Accounting for Share Capital 19 Illustration 4 Konica Limited registered with an authorised equity capital of Rs. 2,00,000 divided into 2,000 shares of Rs. 100 each, issued for subscription of 1,000 shares payable at Rs. 25 per share on application, Rs. 30 per share on allotment, Rs. 20 per share on first call and the balance as and when required. Application money on 1,000 shares was duly received and allotment was made to them. The allotment amount was received in full, but when the first call was made, one shareholder failed to pay the amount on 100 shares held by him and another shareholder with 50 shares, paid the entire amount on his shares. The company did not make any other call. Give the necessary journal entries in the books of the company to record these share capital transactions. Solution