Unit 10 Objectives Biiomolleculles After studying this Unit, you will be able to • explain the characteristics of “It is the harmonious and synchronous progress of chemical biomolecules like carbohydrates, reactions in body which leads to life”. proteins and nucleic acids and hormones; • classify carbohydrates, proteins, A living system grows, sustains and reproduces itself. nucleic acids and vitamins on the The most amazing thing about a living system is that it basis of their structures; is composed of non-living atoms and molecules. The • explain the difference between pursuit of knowledge of what goes on chemically within DNA and RNA; a living system falls in the domain of biochemistry. Living • describe the role of biomolecules systems are made up of various complex biomolecules in biosystem. like carbohydrates, proteins, nucleic acids, lipids, etc. Proteins and carbohydrates are essential constituents of our food. These biomolecules interact with each other and constitute the molecular logic of life processes. In addition, some simple molecules like vitamins and mineral salts also play an important role in the functions of organisms.  Structures and functions of some of these biomolecules are discussed in this Unit. 10.1 Carbohydrates Carbohydrates are primarily produced by plants and form a very large group of naturally occurring organic compounds. Some common examples of carbohydrates are cane sugar, glucose, starch, etc. Most of them have a general formula, Cx(H2O)y, and were considered as hydrates of carbon from where the name carbohydrate was derived. For example, the molecular formula of glucose (C6H12O6) fits into this general formula, C6(H2O)6. But all the compounds which fit into this formula may not be classified as carbohydrates. For example acetic acid (CH3COOH) fits into this general formula, C2(H2O)2 but is not a carbohydrate. Similarly, rhamnose, C6H12O5 is a carbohydrate but does not fit in this definition. A large number of their reactions have shown that they contain specific functional groups. Chemically, the carbohydrates may be defined as optically active polyhydroxy aldehydes or ketones or the compounds which produce such units on hydrolysis. Some of the carbohydrates, which are sweet in taste, are also called sugars. The most common sugar, used in our homes is named as sucrose whereas the sugar present Reprint 2024-25 in milk is known as lactose. Carbohydrates are also called saccharides (Greek: sakcharon means sugar). Carbohydrates are classified on the basis of their behaviour on hydrolysis. They have been broadly divided into following three groups. 10.1.1 (i) Monosaccharides: A carbohydrate that cannot be hydrolysed further Classification of to give simpler unit of polyhydroxy aldehyde or ketone is called a Carbohydrates monosaccharide. About 20 monosaccharides are known to occur in nature. Some common examples are glucose, fructose, ribose, etc. (ii) Oligosaccharides: Carbohydrates that yield two to ten monosaccharide units, on hydrolysis, are called oligosaccharides. They are further classified as disaccharides, trisaccharides, tetrasaccharides, etc., depending upon the number of monosaccharides, they provide on hydrolysis. Amongst these the most common are disaccharides. The two monosaccharide units obtained on hydrolysis of a disaccharide may be same or different. For example, one molecule of sucrose on hydrolysis gives one molecule of glucose and  one molecule of fructose whereas maltose gives two molecules of  only glucose. (iii) Polysaccharides: Carbohydrates which yield a large number of monosaccharide units on hydrolysis are called polysaccharides. Some common examples are starch, cellulose, glycogen, gums, etc. Polysaccharides are not sweet in taste, hence they are also called non-sugars. The carbohydrates may also be classified as either reducing or nonreducing sugars. All those carbohydrates which reduce Fehling’s solution and Tollens’ reagent are referred to as reducing sugars. All monosaccharides whether aldose or ketose are reducing sugars. 10.1.2 Monosaccharides are further classified on the basis of number of carbon Monosaccharides atoms and the functional group present in them. If a monosaccharide contains an aldehyde group, it is known as an aldose and if it contains a keto group, it is known as a ketose. Number of carbon atoms constituting the monosaccharide is also introduced in the name as is evident from the examples given in Table 10.1 Table 10.1: Different Types of Monosaccharides Carbon atoms General term Aldehyde Ketone 3 Triose Aldotriose Ketotriose 4 Tetrose Aldotetrose Ketotetrose 5 Pentose Aldopentose Ketopentose 6 Hexose Aldohexose Ketohexose 7 Heptose Aldoheptose Ketoheptose 10.1.2.1 Glucose Glucose occurs freely in nature as well as in the combined form. It is present in sweet fruits and honey. Ripe grapes also contain glucose in large amounts. It is prepared as follows: Preparation of 1. From sucrose (Cane sugar): If sucrose is boiled with dilute HCl or Glucose H2SO4 in alcoholic solution, glucose and fructose are obtained in equal amounts. Chemistry 282 Reprint 2024-25 C H O + H H+ 12 22 11 2O → C6H12O6 + C6H12O6 Sucrose    Glucose  Fructose 2. From starch: Commercially glucose is obtained by hydrolysis of starch by boiling it with dilute H2SO4 at 393 K under pressure. + (C H O ) + nH O H6 10 5 n 2 → nC H O 393K; 2-3  atm 6 12 6 Starch or cellulose      Glucose Structure of Glucose is an aldohexose and is also known as dextrose. It is the Glucose monomer of many of the larger carbohydrates, namely starch, cellulose. It is probably the most abundant organic compound on earth. It was assigned the structure given below on the basis of the following evidences: CHO 1. Its molecular formula was found to be C6H12O6. (CHOH) 2. On prolonged heating with HI, it forms n-hexane, suggesting that all 4 the six carbon atoms are linked in a straight chain. CH2OH Glucose 3. Glucose reacts with hydroxylamine to form an oxime and adds a molecule of hydrogen cyanide to give cyanohydrin. These reactions confirm the presence of a carbonyl group (>C = O) in glucose. 4. Glucose gets oxidised to six carbon carboxylic acid (gluconic acid) on reaction with a mild oxidising agent like bromine water. This indicates that the carbonyl group is present as an aldehydic group. CHO COOH Br2 water (CHOH) (CHOH) 4 4 CH C 2OH H2OH Gluconic acid 5. Acetylation of glucose with acetic anhydride gives glucose pentaacetate which confirms the presence of five –OH groups. Since it exists as a stable compound, five –OH groups should be attached to different carbon atoms. 283 Biomolecules Reprint 2024-25 6. On oxidation with nitric acid, glucose as well as gluconic acid both yield a dicarboxylic acid, saccharic acid. This indicates the presence of a primary alcoholic (–OH) group in glucose. CHO COOH COOH Oxidation (CHOH) Oxidation 4 (CHOH)4 (CHOH)4 CH2OH COOH CH2OH Saccharic Gluconic acid acid The exact spatial arrangement of different —OH groups was given by Fischer after studying many other properties. Its configuration is correctly represented as I. So gluconic acid is represented as II and saccharic acid as III. CHO COOH COOH H OH H OH H OH HO H HO H HO H H OH H OH H OH H OH H OH H OH CH2OH CH C OH 2OH O I II III Glucose is correctly named as D(+)-glucose. ‘D’ before the name of glucose represents the configuration whereas ‘(+)’ represents dextrorotatory nature of the molecule. It should be remembered that ‘D’ and ‘L’ have no relation with the optical activity of the compound. They are also not related to letter ‘d’ and ‘l’ (see Unit 6). The meaning of D– and L– notations is as follows. The letters ‘D’ or ‘L’ before the name of any compound indicate the relative configuration of a particular stereoisomer of a compound with respect to configuration of some other compound, configuration of which is known. In the case of carbohydrates, this refers to their relation with a particular isomer of glyceraldehyde. Glyceraldehyde contains one asymmetric carbon atom and exists in two enantiomeric forms as shown below. (+) Isomer of glyceraldehyde has ‘D’ configuration. It means that when its structural formula is written on paper following specific conventions which you will study in higher classes, the –OH group lies on right hand side in the structure.  All those compounds which can be chemically correlated to D (+) isomer of glyceraldehyde are said to have Dconfiguration whereas those which can be correlated to ‘L’ (–) isomer of glyceraldehyde are said to have L—configuration. In L (–) isomer –OH group is on left hand side as you can see in the structure. For assigning Chemistry 284 Reprint 2024-25 the configuration of monosaccharides, it is the lowest asymmetric carbon atom (as shown below) which is compared. As in (+)   glucose, —OH on the lowest asymmetric carbon is on the right side which is comparable to (+) glyceraldehyde, so (+) glucose is assigned D-configuration. Other asymmetric carbon atoms of glucose are not considered for this comparison. Also, the structure of glucose and glyceraldehyde is written in a way that most oxidised carbon (in this case –CHO)is at the top. CHO H OH HO H CHO H OH H OH H OH CH CH 2OH 2OH D– (+) – Glyceraldehyde D–(+) – Glucose Cyclic The structure (I) of glucose explained most of its properties but the Structure following reactions and facts could not be explained by this structure. of Glucose 1. Despite having the aldehyde group, glucose does not give Schiff’s test and it does not form the hydrogensulphite addition product with NaHSO3. 2. The pentaacetate of glucose does not react with hydroxylamine indicating the absence of free —CHO group. 3. Glucose is found to exist in two different crystalline forms which are named as a and b. The a-form of glucose (m.p. 419 K) is obtained by crystallisation from concentrated solution of glucose at 303 K while the b-form (m.p. 423 K) is obtained by crystallisation from hot and saturated aqueous solution at 371 K. This behaviour could not be explained by the open chain structure (I) for glucose. It was proposed that one of the —OH groups may add to the —CHO group and form a cyclic hemiacetal structure. It was found that glucose forms a six-membered ring in which —OH at C-5 is involved in ring formation. This explains the absence of —CHO group and also existence of glucose in two forms as shown below. These two cyclic forms exist in equilibrium with open chain structure. The two cyclic hemiacetal forms of glucose differ only in the configuration of the hydroxyl group at C1, called anomeric carbon 285 Biomolecules Reprint 2024-25 (the aldehyde carbon before cyclisation). Such isomers, i.e., a-form and b-form, are called anomers. The six membered cyclic structure of glucose is called pyranose structure (a– or b–), in analogy with pyran. Pyran is a cyclic organic compound with one oxygen atom and five carbon atoms in the ring. The cyclic structure of glucose is more correctly represented by Haworth structure as given below. 10.1.2.2 Fructose Fructose is an important ketohexose. It is obtained along with glucose by the hydrolysis of disaccharide, sucrose. It is a natural monosaccharide found in fruits, honey and vegetables. In its pure form it is used as a sweetner. It is also an important ketohexose. Fructose also has the molecular formula C6H12O6 and Structure on the basis of its reactions it was found to contain a of Fructose ketonic functional group at carbon number 2 and six carbons in straight chain as in the case of glucose. It belongs to D-series and is a laevorotatory compound. It is appropriately written as D-(–)-fructose. Its open chain structure is as shown. It also exists in two cyclic forms which are obtained by the addition of —OH at C5 to the ( ) group. The ring, thus formed is a five membered ring and is named as furanose with analogy to the compound furan. Furan is a five membered cyclic compound with one oxygen and four carbon atoms. The cyclic structures of two anomers of fructose are represented by Haworth structures as given. Chemistry 286 Reprint 2024-25 10.1.3 You have already read that disaccharides on hydrolysis with dilute Disaccharides acids or enzymes yield two molecules of either the same or different monosaccharides. The two monosaccharides are joined together by an oxide linkage formed by the loss of a water molecule. Such a linkage between two monosaccharide units through oxygen atom is called glycosidic linkage. In disaccharides, if the reducing groups of monosaccharides i.e., aldehydic or ketonic groups are bonded, these are non-reducing sugars, e.g., sucrose. On the other hand, sugars in which these functional groups are free, are called reducing sugars, for example, maltose and lactose. (i) Sucrose: One of the common disaccharides is sucrose which on hydrolysis gives equimolar mixture of D-(+)-glucose and D-(-) fructose. These two monosaccharides are held together by a glycosidic linkage between C1 of a-D-glucose and C2 of b-D-fructose. Since the reducing groups of glucose and fructose are involved in glycosidic bond formation, sucrose is a non reducing sugar. Sucrose is dextrorotatory but after hydrolysis gives dextrorotatory glucose and laevorotatory fructose. Since the laevorotation of fructose (–92.4°) is more than dextrorotation of glucose (+ 52.5°), the mixture is laevorotatory. Thus, hydrolysis of sucrose brings about a change in the sign of rotation, from dextro (+) to laevo (–) and the product is named as invert sugar. (ii) Maltose: Another disaccharide, maltose is composed of two a-D-glucose units in which C1 of one glucose (I) is linked to C4 of another glucose unit (II). The free aldehyde group can be produced at C1 of second glucose in solution and it shows reducing properties so it is a reducing sugar. 287 Biomolecules Reprint 2024-25 (iii) Lactose: It is more commonly known as milk sugar since this disaccharide is found in milk. It is composed of b-D-galactose and b-D-glucose. The linkage is between C1 of galactose and C4 of glucose. Free aldehyde group may be produced at C-1 of glucose unit, hence it is also a reducing sugar. 10.1.4 Polysaccharides Polysaccharides contain a large number of monosaccharide units joined together by glycosidic linkages. These are the most commonly encountered carbohydrates in nature. They mainly act as the food storage or structural materials. (i) Starch: Starch is the main storage polysaccharide of plants. It is the most important dietary source for human beings. High content of starch is found in cereals, roots, tubers and some vegetables. It is a polymer of a-glucose and consists of two components— Amylose and Amylopectin. Amylose is water soluble component which constitutes about 15-20% of starch. Chemically amylose is a long unbranched chain with 200-1000 a-D-(+)-glucose units held together by C1– C4 glycosidic linkage. Amylopectin is insoluble in water and constitutes about 8085% of starch. It is a branched chain polymer of a-D-glucose units in which chain is formed by C1–C4 glycosidic linkage whereas branching occurs by C1–C6 glycosidic linkage. Chemistry 288 Reprint 2024-25 (ii) Cellulose: Cellulose occurs exclusively in plants and it is the most abundant organic substance in plant kingdom. It is a predominant constituent of cell wall of plant cells. Cellulose is a straight chain polysaccharide composed only of b-D-glucose units which are joined by glycosidic linkage between C1 of one glucose unit and C4 of the next glucose unit. (iii) Glycogen: The carbohydrates are stored in animal body as glycogen. It is also known as animal starch because its structure is similar to amylopectin and is rather more highly branched. It is present in liver, muscles and brain. When the body needs glucose, enzymes break the glycogen down to glucose. Glycogen is also found in yeast and fungi. 10.1.5 Carbohydrates are essential for life in both plants and animals. They Importance of form a major portion of our food. Honey has been used for a long time Carbohydrates as an instant source of energy by ‘Vaids’ in ayurvedic system of medicine. Carbohydrates are used as storage molecules as starch in plants and glycogen in animals. Cell wall of bacteria and plants is made up of cellulose. We build furniture, etc. from cellulose in the form 289 Biomolecules Reprint 2024-25 of wood and clothe ourselves with cellulose in the form of cotton fibre. They provide raw materials for many important industries like textiles, paper, lacquers and breweries. Two aldopentoses viz. D-ribose and 2-deoxy-D-ribose (Section 10.5.1, Class XII) are present in nucleic acids. Carbohydrates are found in biosystem in combination with many proteins and lipids. Intext Questions 10.1 Glucose or sucrose are soluble in water but cyclohexane or benzene (simple six membered ring compounds) are insoluble in water. Explain. 10.2 What are the expected products of hydrolysis of lactose? 10.3 How do you explain the absence of aldehyde group in the pentaacetate of D-glucose? 10.2 Proteins Proteins are the most abundant biomolecules of the living system. Chief sources of proteins are milk, cheese, pulses, peanuts, fish, meat, etc. They occur in every part of the body and form the fundamental basis of structure and functions of life. They are also required for growth and maintenance of body. The word protein is derived from Greek word, “proteios” which means primary or of prime importance. All proteins are polymers of a-amino acids. 10.2.1 Amino Amino acids contain amino (–NH2) and carboxyl (–COOH) functional Acids groups. Depending upon the relative position of amino group with respect to carboxyl group, the amino acids can be R CH COOH classified as a, b, g, d and so on. Only a-amino acids are obtained on hydrolysis of proteins. They NH2 may contain other functional groups also. a-amino acid All a-amino acids have trivial names, which (R = side chain) usually reflect the property of that compound or its source. Glycine is so named since it has sweet taste (in Greek glykos means sweet) and tyrosine was first obtained from cheese (in Greek, tyros means cheese.) Amino acids are generally represented by a three letter symbol, sometimes one letter symbol is also used. Structures of some commonly occurring amino acids along with their 3-letter and 1-letter symbols are given in Table 10.2. COOH Table 10.2: Natural Amino Acids H2N     H R Name of the Characteristic feature Three letter One letter amino acids of side chain, R symbol code 1. Glycine H Gly G 2. Alanine – CH3 Ala A 3. Valine* (H3C)2CH- Val V 4. Leucine* (H3C)2CH-CH2- Leu L Chemistry 290 Reprint 2024-25 5. Isoleucine* H3C-CH2-CH- Ile I | CH3 6. Arginine* HN=C-NH-(CH2)3- Arg R | NH2 7. Lysine* H2N-(CH2)4- Lys K 8. Glutamic acid HOOC-CH2-CH2- Glu E 9. Aspartic acid HOOC-CH2- Asp D O || 10. Glutamine H2N-C-CH2-CH2- Gln Q O || 11. Asparagine H2N-C-CH2- Asn N 12. Threonine* H3C-CHOH- Thr T 13. Serine HO-CH2- Ser S 14. Cysteine HS-CH2- Cys C 15. Methionine* H3C-S-CH2-CH2- Met M 16. Phenylalanine* C6H5-CH2- Phe F 17. Tyrosine (p)HO-C6H4-CH2- Tyr Y –CH2 18. Tryptophan* Trp W N H 19. Histidine* His H 20. Proline Pro P * essential amino acid, a = entire structure 10.2.2 Amino acids are classified as acidic, basic or neutral depending upon Classification of the relative number of amino and carboxyl groups in their molecule. Amino Acids Equal number of amino and carboxyl groups makes it neutral; more number of amino than carboxyl groups makes it basic and more carboxyl groups as compared to amino groups makes it acidic. The amino acids, which can be synthesised in the body, are known as nonessential amino acids. On the other hand, those which cannot be synthesised in the body and must be obtained through diet, are known as essential amino acids (marked with asterisk in Table 10.2). 291 Biomolecules Reprint 2024-25 Amino acids are usually colourless, crystalline solids. These are water-soluble, high melting solids and behave like salts rather than simple amines or carboxylic acids. This behaviour is due to the presence of both acidic (carboxyl group) and basic (amino group) groups in the same molecule. In aqueous solution, the carboxyl group can lose a proton and amino group can accept a proton, giving rise to a dipolar ion known as zwitter ion. This is neutral but contains both positive and negative charges. In zwitter ionic form, amino acids show amphoteric behaviour as they react both with acids and bases. Except glycine, all other naturally occurring a-amino acids are optically active, since the a-carbon atom is asymmetric. These exist both in ‘D’ and ‘L’ forms. Most naturally occurring amino acids have L-configuration. L-Aminoacids are represented by writing the –NH2 group on left hand side. 10.2.3 Structure You have already read that proteins are the polymers of a-amino acids of Proteins and they are connected to each other by peptide bond or peptide linkage. Chemically, peptide linkage is an amide formed between –COOH group and –NH2 group. The reaction between two molecules of similar or different amino acids, proceeds through the combination of the amino group of one molecule with the carboxyl group of the other. This results in the elimination of a water molecule and formation of a peptide bond –CO–NH–. The product of the reaction is called a dipeptide because it is made up of two amino acids. For example, when carboxyl group of glycine combines with the amino group of alanine we get a dipeptide, glycylalanine. If a third amino acid combines to a dipeptide, the product is called a tripeptide. A tripeptide contains three amino acids linked by two peptide linkages. Similarly when four, five or six amino acids are linked, the respective products are known as tetrapeptide, pentapeptide or hexapeptide, respectively. When the number of such amino acids is more than ten, then the products are called polypeptides. A polypeptide with more than hundred amino acid residues, having molecular mass higher than 10,000u is called a protein. However, the distinction between a polypeptide and a protein is not very sharp. Polypeptides with fewer amino acids are likely to be called proteins if they ordinarily have a well defined conformation of a protein such as insulin which contains 51 amino acids. Proteins can be classified into two types on the basis of their molecular shape. (a) Fibrous proteins When the polypeptide chains run parallel and are held together by hydrogen and disulphide bonds, then fibre– like structure is formed. Such proteins are generally insoluble in water. Some common examples are keratin (present in hair, wool, silk) and myosin (present in muscles), etc. Chemistry 292 Reprint 2024-25 (b) Globular proteins This structure results when the chains of polypeptides coil around to give a spherical shape. These are usually soluble in water. Insulin and albumins are the common examples of globular proteins. Structure and shape of proteins can be studied at four different levels, i.e., primary, secondary, tertiary and quaternary, each level being more complex than the previous one. (i) Primary structure of proteins: Proteins may have one or more polypeptide chains. Each polypeptide in a protein has amino acids linked with each other in a specific sequence and it is this sequence of amino acids that is said to be the primary structure of that protein. Any change in this primary structure i.e., the sequence of amino acids creates a different protein. (ii) Secondary structure of proteins: The secondary structure of protein refers to the shape in which a long polypeptide chain can exist. They are found to exist in two different types of structures viz. a-helix and b-pleated sheet structure. These structures arise due to the regular folding of the backbone of the polypeptide chain due to hydrogen bonding between  and –NH– groups of the peptide bond. a-Helix is one of the most common ways in which a polypeptide chain forms all possible hydrogen bonds by twisting into a right handed screw (helix) with the Fig. 10.1: a-Helix –NH group of each amino acid residue hydrogen bonded to the structure of proteins C   O of an adjacent turn of the helix as shown in Fig.10.1. In b-pleated sheet structure all peptide chains are stretched out to nearly maximum extension and then laid side by side which are held together by intermolecular hydrogen bonds. The structure resembles the pleated folds of drapery and therefore is known as b-pleated sheet. (iii) Tertiary structure of proteins: The tertiary structure of proteins represents overall folding of the polypeptide chains i.e., further folding of the secondary structure. It gives rise to two major molecular shapes viz. fibrous and globular. The main forces which stabilise the 2° and 3° structures of proteins are hydrogen bonds, disulphide linkages, van der Waals and electrostatic forces of attraction. Fig. 10.2: b-Pleated sheet structure of (iv) Quaternary structure of proteins: Some of the proteins proteins are composed of two or more polypeptide chains referred to as sub-units. The spatial arrangement of these subunits with respect to each other is known as quaternary structure. 293 Biomolecules Reprint 2024-25 A diagrammatic representation of all these four structures is given in Figure 10.3 where each coloured ball represents an amino acid. Fig. 10.3: Diagrammatic representation of protein structure (two sub-units of two types in quaternary structure) Fig. 10.4:  Primary, secondary, tertiary and quaternary structures of haemoglobin 10.2.4 Protein found in a biological system with a unique three-dimensional Denaturation of structure and biological activity is called a native protein. When a Proteins protein in its native form, is subjected to physical change like change in temperature or chemical change like change in pH, the hydrogen bonds are disturbed. Due to this, globules unfold and helix get uncoiled and protein loses its biological activity. This is called denaturation of Chemistry 294 Reprint 2024-25 protein. During denaturation secondary and tertiary structures are destroyed but primary structure remains intact. The coagulation of egg white on boiling is a common example of denaturation. Another example is curdling of milk which is caused due to the formation of lactic acid by the bacteria present in milk. Intext Questions 10.4 The melting points and solubility in water of amino acids are generally higher than that of the corresponding halo acids. Explain. 10.5 Where does the water present in the egg go after boiling the egg? 10.3 Enzymes Life is possible due to the coordination of various chemical reactions in living organisms. An example is the digestion of food, absorption of appropriate molecules and ultimately production of energy. This process involves a sequence of reactions and all these reactions occur in the body under very mild conditions. This occurs with the help of certain biocatalysts called enzymes. Almost all the enzymes are globular proteins. Enzymes are very specific for a particular reaction and for a particular substrate. They are generally named after the compound or class of compounds upon which they work. For example, the enzyme that catalyses hydrolysis of maltose into glucose is named as maltase. C12H22O Maltase 11  2 C6H12O6 Maltose G lucose Sometimes enzymes are also named after the reaction, where they are used. For example, the enzymes which catalyse the oxidation of one substrate with simultaneous reduction of another substrate are named as oxidoreductase enzymes. The ending of the name of an enzyme is -ase. 10.3.1 Mechanism Enzymes are needed only in small quantities for the progress of a reaction. of Enzyme Similar to the action of chemical catalysts, enzymes are said to reduce Action the magnitude of activation energy. For example, activation energy for acid hydrolysis of sucrose is 6.22 kJ mol–1, while the activation energy is only 2.15 kJ mol–1 when hydrolysed by the enzyme, sucrase. Mechanism for the enzyme action has been discussed. 10.4 Vitamins It has been observed that certain organic compounds are required in small amounts in our diet but their deficiency causes specific diseases. These compounds are called vitamins. Most of the vitamins cannot be synthesised in our body but plants can synthesise almost all of them, so they are considered as essential food factors. However, the bacteria of the gut can produce some of the vitamins required by us. All the vitamins are generally available in our diet. Different vitamins belong to various chemical classes and it is difficult to define them on the basis of structure. They are generally regarded as organic compounds required in the diet in small amounts to perform specific biological functions for normal maintenance of optimum growth 295 Biomolecules Reprint 2024-25 and health of the organism. Vitamins are designated by alphabets A, B, C, D, etc. Some of them are further named as sub-groups e.g. B1, B2, B6, B12, etc. Excess of vitamins is also harmful and vitamin pills should not be taken without the advice of doctor. The term “Vitamine” was coined from the word vital + amine since the earlier identified compounds had amino groups. Later work showed that most of them did not contain amino groups, so the letter ‘e’ was dropped and the term vitamin is used these days. 10.4.1 Vitamins are classified into two groups depending upon their solubility Classification of in water or fat. Vitamins (i) Fat soluble vitamins: Vitamins which are soluble in fat and oils but insoluble in water are kept in this group. These are vitamins A, D, E and K. They are stored in liver and adipose (fat storing)  tissues. (ii) Water soluble vitamins: B group vitamins and vitamin C are soluble in water so they are grouped together. Water soluble vitamins must be supplied regularly in diet because they are readily excreted in urine and cannot be stored (except vitamin B12) in our body. Some important vitamins, their sources and diseases caused by their deficiency are listed in Table 10.3. Table 10.3: Some important Vitamins, their Sources and their Deficiency Diseases Sl. Name of Sources Deficiency diseases No. Vitamins 1. Vitamin A Fish liver oil, carrots, X e r o p h t h a l m i a butter and milk (hardening of cornea of eye) Night blindness 2. Vitamin B1 Yeast, milk, green Beri beri (loss of appe(Thiamine) vegetables and cereals tite, retarded growth) 3. Vitamin B2 Milk, eggwhite, liver, Cheilosis (fissuring at (Riboflavin) kidney corners of mouth and lips), digestive disorders and burning sensation of the skin. 4. Vitamin B6 Yeast, milk, egg yolk, Convulsions (Pyridoxine) cereals and grams 5. Vitamin B12 Meat, fish, egg and Pernicious anaemia curd (RBC deficient in haemoglobin) 6. Vitamin C Citrus fruits, amla and Scurvy (bleeding gums) (Ascorbic acid) green leafy vegetables 7. Vitamin D Exposure to sunlight, Rickets (bone deformities fish and egg yolk in children) and osteomalacia (soft bones and joint pain in adults) Chemistry 296 Reprint 2024-25 8. Vitamin E Vegetable oils like wheat Increased fragility of germ oil, sunflower oil, RBCs and muscular etc. weakness 9. Vitamin K Green leafy vegetables Increased blood clotting time 10 .5 Nucleic Acids Every generation of each and every species resembles its ancestors in many ways. How are these characteristics transmitted from one generation to the next? It has been observed that nucleus of a living cell is responsible for this transmission of inherent characters, also called heredity. The particles in nucleus of the cell, responsible for heredity, are called chromosomes which are made up of proteins and another type of biomolecules called nucleic acids. These are mainly of two types, the deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA). Since nucleic acids are long chain polymers of nucleotides, so they are also called polynucleotides. James Dewey Watson Born in Chicago, Illinois, in 1928, Dr Watson received his Ph.D. (1950) from Indiana University in Zoology. He is best known for his discovery of the structure of DNA for which he shared with Francis Crick and Maurice Wilkins the 1962 Nobel  prize in Physiology and Medicine. They proposed that DNA molecule takes the shape of a double helix, an elegantly simple structure that resembles a gently twisted ladder. The rails of the ladder are made of alternating units of phosphate and the sugar deoxyribose; the rungs are each composed of a pair of  purine/ pyrimidine bases. This research laid the foundation for the emerging field of molecular biology. The complementary pairing of nucleotide bases explains how identical copies of parental DNA pass on to two daughter cells. This research launched a revolution in biology that led to modern recombinant DNA techniques. 10.5.1 Chemical Complete hydrolysis of DNA (or RNA) yields a pentose sugar, phosphoric Composition acid and nitrogen containing heterocyclic compounds (called bases). In of Nucleic DNA molecules, the sugar moiety is b-D-2-deoxyribose whereas in Acids RNA molecule, it is b-D-ribose. 297 Biomolecules Reprint 2024-25 DNA contains four bases viz. adenine (A), guanine (G), cytosine (C) and thymine (T). RNA also contains four bases, the first three bases are same as in DNA but the fourth one is uracil (U). Cytosine (C) Thymine (T) Uracil (U) 10.5.2 Structure A unit formed by the attachment of a base to 1¢ position of sugar is of Nucleic known as nucleoside. In nucleosides, the sugar carbons are numbered Acids as 1¢, 2¢, 3¢, etc. in order to distinguish these from the bases (Fig. 10.5a). When nucleoside is linked to phosphoric acid at 5¢-position of sugar moiety, we get a nucleotide (Fig. 10.5). Fig. 10.5:  Structure of (a) a nucleoside and (b) a nucleotide Nucleotides are joined together by phosphodiester linkage between 5¢ and 3¢ carbon atoms of the pentose sugar. The formation of a typical dinucleotide is shown in Fig. 10.6. Chemistry 298 Reprint 2024-25 Fig. 10.6:  Formation of a dinucleotide A simplified version of nucleic acid chain is as shown below. Base Base Base Sugar Phosphate Sugar Phosphate Sugar n Information regarding the sequence of nucleotides in the chain of a nucleic acid is called its primary structure. Nucleic acids have a secondary structure also. James Watson and Francis Crick gave a double strand helix structure for DNA (Fig. 10.7). Two nucleic acid chains are wound about each other and held together by hydrogen bonds between pairs of bases. The two strands are complementary to each other because the hydrogen bonds are formed between specific pairs of bases. Adenine forms hydrogen bonds with thymine whereas cytosine forms hydrogen bonds with guanine. In secondary structure of RNA single stranded helics is present which sometimes foldsback on itself. RNA molecules are of three types and they perform different functions. They are named as messenger RNA (m-RNA), ribosomal RNA (r-RNA) and transfer RNA (t-RNA). Fig. 10.7: Double strand helix structure for DNA 299 Biomolecules Reprint 2024-25 Har Gobind Khorana Har Gobind Khorana, was born in 1922. He obtained his M.Sc. degree from Punjab University in Lahore. He worked with Professor Vladimir Prelog, who moulded Khorana’s thought  and philosophy towards science, work and effort. After a brief stay in India in 1949, Khorana went back to England and worked with Professor G.W. Kenner and Professor A.R.Todd. It was at Cambridge, U.K. that he got interested in both proteins and nucleic acids. Dr Khorana shared the Nobel Prize for Medicine and Physiology in 1968 with Marshall Nirenberg and Robert Holley for cracking the genetic code. DNA Fingerprinting It is known that every individual has unique fingerprints. These occur at the tips of the fingers and have been used for identification for a long time but these can be altered by surgery. A sequence of bases on DNA is also unique for a person and information regarding this is called DNA fingerprinting. It is same for every cell and cannot be altered by any known treatment. DNA fingerprinting is now used (i) in forensic laboratories for identification of criminals. (ii) to determine paternity of an individual. (iii) to identify the dead bodies in any accident by comparing the DNA’s of parents or children. (iv) to identify racial groups to rewrite biological evolution. 10.5.3 Biological DNA is the chemical basis of heredity and may be regarded as the reserve Functions of genetic information. DNA is exclusively responsible for maintaining of Nucleic the identity of different species of organisms over millions of years. A