Unit 5 Objectives Coordination After studying this Unit, you will be able to Compounds • appreciate the postulates of Werner’s theory of coordination compounds; Coordination Compounds are the backbone of modern inorganic • know the meaning of the terms: and bio–inorganic chemistry and chemical industry. coordination entity, central atom/ ion, ligand, coordination number, coordination sphere, coordination In the previous Unit we learnt that the transition metals polyhedron, oxidation number, form a large number of complex compounds in which homoleptic and heteroleptic; the metal atoms are bound to a number of anions or • learn the rules of nomenclature neutral molecules by sharing of electrons. In modern of coordination compounds; terminology such compounds are called coordination • write the formulas and names compounds. The chemistry of coordination compounds of mononuclear coordination is an important and challenging area of modern compounds; inorganic chemistry. New concepts of chemical bonding • define different types of isomerism and molecular structure have provided insights into in coordination compounds; the functioning of these compounds as vital components • understand the nature of bonding of biological systems. Chlorophyll, haemoglobin and in coordination compounds in terms of the Valence Bond and vitamin B12 are coordination compounds of magnesium, Crystal Field theories; iron and cobalt respectively. Variety of metallurgical • appreciate the importance and processes, industrial catalysts and analytical reagents applications of coordination involve the use of coordination compounds. compounds in our day to day life. Coordination compounds also find many applications in electroplating, textile dyeing and medicinal chemistry. 5. 1 Werner’s Alfred Werner (1866-1919), a Swiss chemist was the first to formulate his ideas about the structures of coordination compounds. He prepared Theory of and characterised a large number of coordination compounds and Coordination studied their physical and chemical behaviour by simple experimental Compounds techniques. Werner proposed the concept of a primary valence and a secondary valence for a metal ion. Binary compounds such as CrCl3, CoCl2 or PdCl2 have primary valence of 3, 2 and 2 respectively. In a series of compounds of cobalt(III) chloride with ammonia, it was found that some of the chloride ions could be precipitated as AgCl on adding excess silver nitrate solution in cold but some remained in solution. Chemistry 118 Reprint 2024-25 1 mol CoCl3.6NH3 (Yellow)  gave 3 mol AgCl 1 mol CoCl3.5NH3 (Purple)  gave 2 mol AgCl 1 mol CoCl3.4NH3 (Green)  gave 1 mol AgCl 1 mol CoCl3.4NH3 (Violet)  gave 1 mol AgCl These observations, together with the results of conductivity measurements in solution can be explained if (i) six groups in all, either chloride ions or ammonia molecules or both, remain bonded to the cobalt ion during the reaction and (ii) the compounds are formulated as shown in Table 5.1, where the atoms within the square brackets form a single entity which does not dissociate under the reaction conditions. Werner proposed the term secondary valence for the number of groups bound directly to the metal ion; in each of these examples the secondary valences are six. Table 5.1: Formulation of Cobalt(III) Chloride-Ammonia Complexes Colour Formula Solution conductivity corresponds to 3+ – Yellow [Co(NH3)6] 3Cl 1:3 electrolyte 2+ – Purple [CoCl(NH3)5] 2Cl 1:2 electrolyte + – Green [CoCl2(NH3)4] Cl 1:1 electrolyte + – Violet [CoCl2(NH3)4] Cl 1:1 electrolyte Note that the last two compounds in Table 5.1 have identical empirical formula, CoCl3.4NH3, but distinct properties. Such compounds are termed as isomers. Werner in 1898, propounded his theory of coordination compounds. The main postulates are: 1. In coordination compounds metals show two types of linkages (valences)-primary and secondary. 2. The primary valences are normally ionisable and are satisfied by negative ions. 3. The secondary valences are non ionisable. These are satisfied by neutral molecules or negative ions. The secondary valence is equal to the coordination number and is fixed for a metal. 4. The ions/groups bound by the secondary linkages to the metal have characteristic spatial arrangements corresponding to different coordination numbers. In modern formulations, such spatial arrangements are called coordination polyhedra. The species within the square bracket are coordination entities or complexes and the ions outside the square bracket are called counter ions. He further postulated that octahedral, tetrahedral and square planar geometrical shapes are more common in coordination compounds of 3+ 2+ + transition metals. Thus, [Co(NH3)6] , [CoCl(NH3)5]  and [CoCl2(NH3)4] 2– are octahedral entities, while [Ni(CO)4] and [PtCl4]  are tetrahedral and square planar, respectively. 119 Coordination Compounds Reprint 2024-25 On the basis of the following observations made with aqueous solutions, Example 5.1 assign secondary valences to metals in the following compounds: Formula Moles of AgCl precipitated per mole of the compounds with excess AgNO3 (i) PdCl2.4NH3 2 (ii) NiCl2.6H2O 2 (iii) PtCl4.2HCl 0 (iv) CoCl3.4NH3 1 (v) PtCl2.2NH3 0 (i) Secondary 4 (ii) Secondary 6 Solution (iii) Secondary 6 (iv) Secondary 6 (v) Secondary 4 Difference between a double salt and a complex Both double salts as well as complexes are formed by the combination of two or more stable compounds in stoichiometric ratio. However, they differ in the fact that double salts such as carnallite, KCl.MgCl2.6H2O, Mohr’s salt, FeSO4.(NH4)2SO4.6H2O, potash alum, KAl(SO4)2.12H2O, etc. dissociate into simple ions completely when dissolved in water. However, 4– complex ions such as [Fe(CN)6] of K4 [Fe(CN)6] do not dissociate into 2+ – Fe  and CN  ions. Werner was born on December 12, 1866, in Mülhouse, a small community in the French province of Alsace. His study of chemistry began in Karlsruhe (Germany) and continued in Zurich (Switzerland), where in his doctoral thesis in 1890, he explained the difference in properties of certain nitrogen containing organic ( 1866-1919) substances on the basis of isomerism. He extended vant Hoff’s theory of tetrahedral carbon atom and modified it for nitrogen. Werner showed optical and electrical differences between complex compounds based on physical measurements. In fact, Werner was the first to discover optical activity in certain coordination compounds. He, at the age of 29 years became a full professor at Technische Hochschule in Zurich in 1895. Alfred Werner was a chemist and educationist. His accomplishments included the development of the theory of coordination compounds. This theory, in which Werner proposed revolutionary ideas about how atoms and molecules are linked together, was formulated in a span of only three years, from 1890 to 1893. The remainder of his career was spent gathering the experimental support required to validate his new ideas. Werner became the first Swiss chemist to win the Nobel Prize in 1913 for his work on the linkage of atoms and the coordination theory. Chemistry 120 Reprint 2024-25 5.2 Definitions of ( a ) Coordination entity Some A coordination entity constitutes a central metal atom or ion bonded to a fixed number of ions or molecules. For example, [CoCl3(NH3)3] Important is a coordination entity in which the cobalt ion is surrounded by Terms three ammonia molecules and three chloride ions. Other examples 4– 3+ Pertaining to are [Ni(CO)4], [PtCl2(NH3)2], [Fe(CN)6] , [Co(NH3)6] . Coordination (b) Central atom/ion In a coordination entity, the atom/ion to which a fixed number Compounds of ions/groups are bound in a definite geometrical arrangement around it, is called the central atom or ion. For example, the central atom/ion in the coordination entities: [NiCl2(H2O)4], 2+ 3– 2+ 3+ 3+ [CoCl(NH3)5] and [Fe(CN)6]  are Ni , Co  and Fe , respectively. These central atoms/ions are also referred to as Lewis acids. ( c ) Ligands The ions or molecules bound to the central atom/ion in the coordination entity are called ligands. These may be simple ions – such as Cl , small molecules such as H2O or NH3, larger molecules such as H2NCH2CH2NH2 or N(CH2CH2NH2)3 or even macromolecules, such as proteins. When a ligand is bound to a metal ion through a single donor – atom, as with Cl , H2O or NH3, the ligand is said to be unidentate. When a ligand can bind through two donor atoms as in 2– H2NCH2CH2NH2 (ethane-1,2-diamine) or C2O4  (oxalate), the ligand is said to be didentate and when several donor atoms are present in a single ligand as in N(CH2CH2NH2)3, the ligand is said to be polydentate 4– . Ethylenediaminetetraacetate ion (EDTA ) is an important hexadentate ligand. It can bind through two nitrogen and four oxygen atoms to a central metal ion. When a di- or polydentate ligand uses its two or more donor atoms simultaneously to bind a single metal ion, it is said to be a chelate ligand. The number of such ligating groups is called the denticity of the ligand. Such complexes, called chelate complexes tend to be more stable than similar complexes containing unidentate ligands. Ligand which has two different donor atoms and either of the two ligetes in the complex is called ambidentate ligand – . Examples of such ligands are the NO2  and – – SCN  ions. NO2  ion can coordinate either through nitrogen or through oxygen to a central metal atom/ion. – Similarly, SCN  ion can coordinate through the sulphur or nitrogen atom. ( d ) Coordination number The coordination number (CN) of a metal ion in a complex can be defined as the number of ligand donor atoms to which the metal is 2– directly bonded. For example, in the complex ions, [PtCl6]  and 2+ [Ni(NH3)4] , the coordination number of Pt and Ni are 6 and 4 3– respectively. Similarly, in the complex ions, [Fe(C2O4)3]  and 3+ [Co(en)3] , the coordination number of both, Fe and Co, is 6 because 2– C2O4  and en (ethane-1,2-diamine) are didentate ligands. 121 Coordination Compounds Reprint 2024-25 It is important to note here that coordination number of the central atom/ion is determined only by the number of sigma bonds formed by the ligand with the central atom/ion. Pi bonds, if formed between the ligand and the central atom/ion, are not counted for this purpose. (e) Coordination sphere The central atom/ion and the ligands attached to it are enclosed in square bracket and is collectively termed as the coordination sphere. The ionisable groups are written outside the bracket and are called counter ions. For example, in the complex K4[Fe(CN)6], 4– + the coordination sphere is [Fe(CN)6]  and the counter ion is K . ( f ) Coordination polyhedron The spatial arrangement of the ligand atoms which are directly attached to the central atom/ion defines a coordination polyhedron about the central atom. The most common coordination polyhedra are octahedral, square planar and 3+ tetrahedral. For example, [Co(NH3)6]  is octahedral, [Ni(CO)4] is 2– tetrahedral and [PtCl4]  is square planar. Fig. 5.1 shows the shapes of different coordination polyhedra. Fig. 5.1: Shapes of different coordination polyhedra. M represents the central atom/ion and L, a unidentate ligand. (g) Oxidation number of central atom The oxidation number of the central atom in a complex is defined as the charge it would carry if all the ligands are removed along with the electron pairs that are shared with the central atom. The oxidation number is represented by a Roman numeral in parenthesis following the name of the coordination entity. For example, oxidation 3– number of copper in [Cu(CN)4]  is +1 and it is written as Cu(I). ( h ) Homoleptic and heteroleptic complexes Complexes in which a metal is bound to only one kind of donor 3+ groups, e.g., [Co(NH3)6] , are known as homoleptic. Complexes in which a metal is bound to more than one kind of donor groups, + e.g., [Co(NH3)4Cl2] , are known as heteroleptic. 5 .3 Nomenclature Nomenclature is important in Coordination Chemistry because of the o f need to have an unambiguous method of describing formulas and writing systematic names, particularly when dealing with isomers. The Coordination formulas and names adopted for coordination entities are based on the Compounds recommendations of the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC). Chemistry 122 Reprint 2024-25 5.3.1 Formulas of The formula of a compound is a shorthand tool used to provide basic Mononuclear information about the constitution of the compound in a concise and Coordination convenient manner. Mononuclear coordination entities contain a single Entities central metal atom. The following rules are applied while writing the formulas: (i) The central atom is listed first. (ii) The ligands are then listed in alphabetical order. The placement of a ligand in the list does not depend on its charge. (iii) Polydentate ligands are also listed alphabetically. In case of abbreviated ligand, the first letter of the abbreviation is used to determine the position of the ligand in the alphabetical order. (iv) The formula for the entire coordination entity, whether charged or not, is enclosed in square brackets. When ligands are polyatomic, their formulas are enclosed in parentheses. Ligand abbreviations are also enclosed in parentheses. (v) There should be no space between the ligands and the metal within a coordination sphere. (vi) When the formula of a charged coordination entity is to be written Note: The 2004 IUPAC without that of the counter ion, the charge is indicated outside the draft recommends that square brackets as a right superscript with the number before the ligands will be sorted 3– 3+ alphabetically, sign. For example, [Co(CN)6] , [Cr(H2O)6] , etc. irrespective of charge. (vii) The charge of the cation(s) is balanced by the charge of the anion(s). 5.3.2 Naming of The names of coordination compounds are derived by following the Mononuclear principles of additive nomenclature. Thus, the groups that surround the Coordination central atom must be identified in the name. They are listed as prefixes Compounds to the name of the central atom along with any appropriate multipliers. The following rules are used when naming coordination compounds: (i) The cation is named first in both positively and negatively charged coordination entities. (ii) The ligands are named in an alphabetical order before the name of the central atom/ion. (This procedure is reversed from writing formula). (iii) Names of the anionic ligands end in –o, those of neutral and cationic ligands are the same except aqua for H2O, ammine for NH3, carbonyl for CO and nitrosyl for NO. While writing the formula of coordination entity, these are enclosed in brackets ( ). (iv) Prefixes mono, di, tri, etc., are used to indicate the number of the individual ligands in the coordination entity. When the names of the ligands include a numerical prefix, then the terms, bis, tris, tetrakis are used, the ligand to which they refer being placed in parentheses. For example, [NiCl2(PPh3)2] is named as dichloridobis(triphenylphosphine)nickel(II). (v) Oxidation state of the metal in cation, anion or neutral coordination entity is indicated by Roman numeral in parenthesis. (vi) If the complex ion is a cation, the metal is named same as the element. For example, Co in a complex cation is called cobalt and Note: The 2004 IUPAC draft Pt is called platinum. If the complex ion is an anion, the name of recommends that the metal ends with the suffix – ate. For example, Co in a complex 2 anionic ligands will anion,    end with–ido so that Co SCN  s all d c bal 4  i c e o tate. For some metals, the Latin names are used in the complex anions, e.g., ferrate for Fe. chloro would become chlorido, etc. 123 Coordination Compounds Reprint 2024-25 (vii) The neutral complex molecule is named similar to that of the complex cation. The following examples illustrate the nomenclature for coordination compounds. 1. [Cr(NH3)3(H2O)3]Cl3 is named as: triamminetriaquachromium(III) chloride Explanation: The complex ion is inside the square bracket, which is a cation. The amine ligands are named before the aqua ligands according to alphabetical order. Since there are three chloride ions in the compound, the charge on the complex ion must be +3 (since the compound is electrically neutral). From the charge on the complex ion and the charge on the ligands, we can calculate the oxidation number of the metal. In this example, all the ligands are neutral molecules. Therefore, the oxidation number of chromium must be the same as the charge of the complex  ion, +3. 2. [Co(H2NCH2CH2NH2)3]2(SO4)3 is named as: tris(ethane-1,2–diamine)cobalt(III) sulphate Explanation: The sulphate is the counter anion in this molecule. Since it takes 3 sulphates to bond with two complex cations, the charge on each complex cation must be +3. Further, ethane-1,2– Notice how the name diamine is a neutral molecule, so the oxidation number of cobalt of the metal differs in in the complex ion must be +3. Remember that you never have to cation and anion even though they contain the indicate the number of cations and anions in the name of an same metal ions. ionic compound. 3. [Ag(NH3)2][Ag(CN)2] is named as: diamminesilver(I) dicyanidoargentate(I) Example 5.2 Write the formulas for the following coordination compounds: (a) Tetraammineaquachloridocobalt(III) chloride (b) Potassium tetrahydroxidozincate(II) (c) Potassium trioxalatoaluminate(III) (d) Dichloridobis(ethane-1,2-diamine)cobalt(III) (e) Tetracarbonylnickel(0) Solution (a) [Co(NH ) (H O)Cl]Cl (b) K [Zn(OH) ] (c) K [Al(C O ) ] 3 4 2 2 2 4 3 2 4 3 (d) [CoCl (en) ]+ (e) [Ni(CO) ] 2 2 4 Example 5.3 Write the IUPAC names of the following coordination compounds: (a) [Pt(NH3)2Cl(NO2)] (b) K3[Cr(C2O4)3] (c) [CoCl2(en)2]Cl (d) [Co(NH3)5(CO3)]Cl (e) Hg[Co(SCN)4] Solution (a) Diamminechloridonitrito-N-platinum(II) (b) Potassium trioxalatochromate(III) (c) Dichloridobis(ethane-1,2-diamine)cobalt(III) chloride (d) Pentaamminecarbonatocobalt(III) chloride (e) Mercury (I) tetrathiocyanato-S-cobaltate(III) Chemistry 124 Reprint 2024-25 Intext Questions 5.1 Write the formulas for the following coordination compounds: (i) Tetraamminediaquacobalt(III) chloride (ii) Potassium tetracyanidonickelate(II) (iii) Tris(ethane–1,2–diamine) chromium(III) chloride (iv) Amminebromidochloridonitrito-N-platinate(II) (v) Dichloridobis(ethane–1,2–diamine)platinum(IV) nitrate (vi) Iron(III) hexacyanidoferrate(II) 5.2 Write the IUPAC names of the following coordination compounds: (i) [Co(NH3)6]Cl3 (ii) [Co(NH3)5Cl]Cl2 (iii) K3[Fe(CN)6] (iv) K3[Fe(C2O4)3] (v) K2[PdCl4] (vi) [Pt(NH3)2Cl(NH2CH3)]Cl 5 .4 Isomerism in Isomers are two or more compounds that have the same chemical Coordination formula but a different arrangement of atoms. Because of the different arrangement of atoms, they differ in one or more physical or chemical Compounds properties. Two principal types of isomerism are known among coordination compounds. Each of which can be further subdivided. (a) Stereoisomerism (i) Geometrical isomerism (ii) Optical isomerism (b ) Structural isomerism (i) Linkage isomerism (ii) Coordination isomerism (iii) Ionisation isomerism (iv) Solvate isomerism Stereoisomers have the same chemical formula and chemical bonds but they have different spatial arrangement. Structural isomers have different bonds. A detailed account of these isomers are given below. 5.4.1 Geometric Isomerism This type of isomerism arises in heteroleptic complexes due to different possible geometric arrangements of the ligands. Important examples of this behaviour are found with coordination numbers 4 and 6. In a square planar complex of formula [MX2L2] (X and L are unidentate), the two ligands X may be arranged adjacent to each Fig. 5.2: Geometrical isomers (cis and trans) other in a cis isomer, or opposite to each other of Pt [NH ) Cl ] 3 2 2 in a trans isomer as depicted in Fig. 5.2. + + Other square planar complex of the type Cl Cl MABXL (where A, B, X, L are unidentates) N H 3 Cl N H 3 N H 3 shows three isomers-two cis and one trans. Co Co You may attempt to draw these structures. N H 3 N H N H N H 3 3 3 Such isomerism is not possible for a tetrahedral N H Cl 3 geometry but similar behaviour is possible in cis trans octahedral complexes of formula [MX2L4] in which the two ligands X may be oriented cis or Fig. 5.3: Geometrical isomers (cis and trans) trans to each other (Fig. 5.3). of [Co(NH ) Cl ]+ 3 4 2 125 Coordination Compounds Reprint 2024-25 This type of isomerism also arises when didentate ligands L – L [e.g., NH2 CH2 CH2 NH2 (en)] are present in complexes of formula [MX2(L – L)2] (Fig. 5.4). Another type of geometrical isomerism occurs in octahedral Fig. 5.4: Geometrical isomers (cis and trans) coordination entities of the type of [CoCl (en) ] 2 2 [Ma3b3] like [Co(NH3)3(NO2)3]. If three donor atoms of the same ligands occupy adjacent positions at the corners of an octahedral Fig. 5.5 face, we have the facial (fac) The facial (fac) and isomer. When the positions are meridional (mer) around the meridian of the isomers of octahedron, we get the meridional [Co(NH ) (NO ) ] 3 3 2 3 (mer) isomer (Fig. 5.5). Why is geometrical isomerism not possible in tetrahedral complexes Example 5.4 having two different types of unidentate ligands coordinated with the central metal ion ? Tetrahedral complexes do not show geometrical isomerism because Solution the relative positions of the unidentate ligands attached to the central metal atom are the same with respect to each other. 5.4.2 Optical Isomerism Optical isomers are mirror images that cannot be superimposed on one another. These are called as enantiomers. The molecules or ions that cannot be superimposed are called chiral. The two forms are called dextro (d) and laevo (l) depending upon the direction they rotate the plane of polarised light in a polarimeter (d rotates to the right, l to the left). Optical isomerism is common in octahedral complexes involving Fig.5.6:  Optical isomers (d and l) of [Co(en) ] 3+ 3 didentate ligands (Fig. 5.6). In a coordination entity of the type 2+ [PtCl2(en)2] , only the cis-isomer shows optical activity (Fig. 5.7). Fig.5.7 Optical isomers (d and l) of cis- [PtCl (en) ]2+ 2 2 Chemistry 126 Reprint 2024-25 Example 5.5 – Draw structures of geometrical isomers of [Fe(NH3)2(CN)4] Solution Example 5.6 Out of the following two coordination entities which is chiral (optically active)? 3– 3– (a) cis-[CrCl2(ox)2] (b) trans-[CrCl2(ox)2] Solution The two entities are represented as 3- Out of the two, (a) cis - [CrCl2(ox)2] is chiral (optically active). 5.4.3 Linkage Linkage isomerism arises in a coordination compound containing Isomerism ambidentate ligand. A simple example is provided by complexes – containing the thiocyanate ligand, NCS , which may bind through the nitrogen to give M–NCS or through sulphur to give M–SCN. Jørgensen discovered such behaviour in the complex [Co(NH3)5(NO2)]Cl2, which is obtained as the red form, in which the nitrite ligand is bound through oxygen (–ONO), and as the yellow form, in which the nitrite ligand is bound through nitrogen (–NO2). 5.4.4 Coordination This type of isomerism arises from the interchange of ligands between Isomerism cationic and anionic entities of different metal ions present in a complex. An example is provided by [Co(NH3)6][Cr(CN)6], in which the NH3 ligands 3+ – 3+ are bound to Co  and the CN  ligands to Cr . In its coordination 3+ isomer [Cr(NH3)6][Co(CN)6], the NH3 ligands are bound to Cr  and the – 3+ CN  ligands to Co . 5.4.5 Ionisation This form of isomerism arises when the counter ion in a complex salt Isomerism is itself a potential ligand and can displace a ligand which can then become the counter ion. An example is provided by the ionisation isomers [Co(NH3)5(SO4)]Br and [Co(NH3)5Br]SO4. 127 Coordination Compounds Reprint 2024-25 5.4.6 Solvate This form of isomerism is known as ‘hydrate isomerism’ in case where Isomerism water is involved as a solvent. This is similar to ionisation isomerism. Solvate isomers differ by whether or not a solvent molecule is directly bonded to the metal ion or merely present as free solvent moleculesin the crystal lattice. An example is provided by the aqua complex [Cr(H2O)6]Cl3 (violet) and its solvate isomer [Cr(H2O)5Cl]Cl2.H2O (grey-green). Intext Questions 5.3 Indicate the types of isomerism exhibited by the following complexes and draw the structures for these isomers: (i) K[Cr(H2O)2(C2O4)2 (ii) [Co(en)3]Cl3 (iii) [Co(NH3)5(NO2)](NO3)2 (iv) [Pt(NH3)(H2O)Cl2] 5.4 Give evidence that [Co(NH3)5Cl]SO4 and [Co(NH3)5(SO4)]Cl are ionisation isomers. 5 .5 Bonding in Werner was the first to describe the bonding features in coordination Coordination compounds. But his theory could not answer basic questions like: Compounds (i) Why only certain elements possess the remarkable property of forming coordination compounds? (ii) Why the bonds in coordination compounds have directional properties? (iii) Why coordination compounds have characteristic magnetic and optical properties? Many approaches have been put forth to explain the nature of bonding in coordination compounds viz. Valence Bond Theory (VBT), Crystal Field Theory (CFT), Ligand Field Theory (LFT) and Molecular Orbital Theory (MOT). We shall focus our attention on elementary treatment of the application of VBT and CFT to coordination compounds. 5.5.1 Valence According to this theory, the metal atom or ion under the influence of Bond ligands can use its (n-1)d, ns, np or ns, np, nd orbitals for hybridisation Theory to yield a set of equivalent orbitals of definite geometry such as octahedral, tetrahedral, square planar and so on (Table 5.2). These hybridised orbitals are allowed to overlap with ligand orbitals that can donate electron pairs for bonding. This is illustrated by the following examples. Table 5.2: Number of Orbitals and Types of Hybridisations Coordination Type of Distribution of hybrid number hybridisation orbitals in space 3 4 sp Tetrahedral 2 4 dsp Square planar 3 5 sp d Trigonal bipyramidal 3 2 6 sp d Octahedral 2 3 6 d sp Octahedral Chemistry 128 Reprint 2024-25 It is usually possible to predict the geometry of a complex from the knowledge of its magnetic behaviour on the basis of the valence bond theory. In the diamagnetic octahedral complex, 3+ [Co(NH3)6] , the cobalt ion is in +3 oxidation state and has the electronic 6 configuration 3d . The hybridisation scheme is as shown in diagram. Six pairs of electrons, one from each NH3 molecule, occupy the six hybrid orbitals. Thus, the complex has octahedral geometry and is diamagnetic because of the absence of unpaired electron. In the formation of this complex, since the inner d orbital (3d) is used in hybridisation, 3+ the complex, [Co(NH3)6]  is called an inner orbital or low spin or spin 3– paired complex. The paramagnetic octahedral complex, [CoF6]  uses 3 2 outer orbital (4d ) in hybridisation (sp d ). It is thus called outer orbital or high spin or spin free complex. Thus: 3+ Orbitals of Co ion 3d 4s 4p 4d 3 2 sp d hybridised 3+ orbitals of Co 3d 3 3 sp d hybrid 3– [CoF6] (outer orbital or high spin complex) 3d Six pairs of electrons – from six F ions In tetrahedral complexes one s and three p orbitals are hybridised to form four equivalent orbitals oriented tetrahedrally. This is ill2- ustrated below for [NiCl4] . Here nickel is in +2 oxidation state and the ion has the electronic 8 configuration 3d . The hybridisation scheme is as shown in diagram. – Each Cl  ion donates a pair of electrons. The compound is paramagnetic since it contains two unpaired electrons. Similarly, [Ni(CO)4] has tetrahedral geometry but is diamagnetic since nickel is in zero oxidation state and contains no unpaired electron. 129 Coordination Compounds Reprint 2024-25 2 In the square planar complexes, the hybridisation involved is dsp . 2– An example is [Ni(CN)4] . Here nickel is in +2 oxidation state and has 8 the electronic configuration 3d . The hybridisation scheme is as shown in diagram: 2+ Orbitals of Ni ion 3d 4s 4p 2 dsp hybridised 2+ orbitals of Ni 2 3d dsp hydrid 4p 2– [Ni(CN)4] (low spin complex) 3d Four pairs of electrons 4p – from 4 CN groups Each of the hybridised orbitals receives a pair of electrons from a cyanide ion. The compound is diamagnetic as evident from the absence of unpaired electron. It is important to note that the hybrid orbitals do not actually exist. In fact, hybridisation is a mathematical manipulation of wave equation for the atomic orbitals involved. 5.5.2 Magnetic The magnetic moment of coordination compounds can be measured Properties by the magnetic susceptibility experiments. The results can be used to of obtain information about the number of unpaired electrons and hence Coordination structures adopted by metal complexes. Compounds A critical study of the magnetic data of coordination compounds of metals of the first transition series reveals some complications. For 3+ 1 3+ metal ions with upto three electrons in the d orbitals, like Ti  (d ); V 2 3+ 3 (d ); Cr  (d ); two vacant d orbitals are available for octahedral hybridisation with 4s and 4p orbitals. The magnetic behaviour of these free ions and their coordination entities is similar. When more than three 3d electrons are present, the required pair of 3d orbitals for octahedral hybridisation is not directly available (as a consequence of 4 2+ 3+ 5 2+ 3+ 6 2+ 3+ Hund’s rule). Thus, for d  (Cr , Mn ), d  (Mn , Fe ), d  (Fe , Co ) cases, a vacant pair of d orbitals results only by pairing of 3d electrons which leaves two, one and zero unpaired electrons, respectively. The magnetic data agree with maximum spin pairing in many cases, 6 especially with coordination compounds containing d  ions. However, with species containing 4 and 5 d d  ions there are complications. [Mn(CN)6] 3– 3– has magnetic moment of two unpaired electrons while [MnCl6]  has a 3– paramagnetic moment of four unpaired electrons. [Fe(CN)6]  has magnetic 3– moment of a single unpaired electron while [FeF6]  has a paramagnetic 3– moment of five unpaired electrons. [CoF6]  is paramagnetic with four 3– unpaired electrons while [Co(C2O4)3]  is diamagnetic. This apparent anomaly is explained by valence bond theory in terms of formation of 3– 3– inner orbital and outer orbital coordination entities. [Mn(CN)6] , [Fe(CN)6] 3– 2 3 and [Co(C2O4)3]  are inner orbital complexes involving d sp  hybridisation, the former two complexes are paramagnetic and the latter diamagnetic. 3– 3– 3– On the other hand, [MnCl6] , [FeF6]  and [CoF6-]  are outer orbital 3 2 complexes involving sp d  hybridisation and are paramagnetic corresponding to four, five and four unpaired electrons. Chemistry 130