Unit 8 Objectives Alldehydes, Ketones After studying this Unit, you will be able to and Carboxylliic • write the common  and IUPAC names of aldehydes, ketones and carboxylic acids; Aciids • write the structures of the compounds containing functional groups namely carbonyl and carboxyl groups; Carbonyl compounds are of utmost importance to organic chemistry. They are constituents of fabrics, flavourings, plastics • describe the important methods and drugs. of preparation and reactions of these classes of compounds; In the previous Unit, you have studied organic • correlate physical properties and compounds with functional groups containing carbonchemical reactions of aldehydes, oxygen single bond. In this Unit, we will study about the ketones and carboxylic acids, organic compounds containing carbon-oxygen double with their structures; bond (>C=O) called carbonyl group, which is one of the • explain the mechanism of a few most important functional groups in organic chemistry. selected reactions of aldehydes In aldehydes, the carbonyl group is bonded to a and ketones; carbon and hydrogen while in the ketones, it is bonded • understand various factors to two carbon atoms. The carbonyl compounds in which affecting the acidity of carboxylic carbon of carbonyl group is bonded to carbon or acids and their reactions; hydrogen and oxygen of hydroxyl moiety (-OH) are • describe the uses of aldehydes, known as carboxylic acids, while in compounds where ketones and carboxylic acids. carbon is attached to carbon or hydrogen and nitrogen of -NH2 moiety or to halogens are called amides and acyl halides respectively. Esters and anhydrides are derivatives of carboxylic acids. The general formulas of these classes of compounds are given below: Reprint 2024-25 Aldehydes, ketones and carboxylic acids are widespread in plants and animal kingdom. They play an important role in biochemical processes of life. They add fragrance and flavour to nature, for example, vanillin (from vanilla beans), salicylaldehyde (from meadow sweet) and cinnamaldehyde (from cinnamon) have very pleasant fragrances. They are used in many food products and pharmaceuticals to add flavours. Some of these families are manufactured for use as solvents (i.e., acetone) and for preparing materials like adhesives, paints, resins, perfumes, plastics, fabrics, etc. 8. 1 Nomenclature and Structure of Carbonyl Group 8.1.1 I. Aldehydes and ketones Nomenclature Aldehydes and ketones are the simplest and most important carbonyl compounds. There are two systems of nomenclature of aldehydes and ketones. (a) Common names Aldehydes and ketones are often called by their common names instead of IUPAC names. The common names of most aldehydes are derived from the common names of the corresponding carboxylic acids [Section 8.6.1] by replacing the ending –ic of acid with aldehyde. At the same time, the names reflect the Latin or Greek term for the original source of the acid or aldehyde. The location of the substituent in the carbon chain is indicated by Greek letters a, b, g, d, etc. The a-carbon being the one directly linked to the aldehyde group, bcarbon the next, and so on. For example Chemistry 228 Reprint 2024-25 The common names of ketones are derived by naming two alkyl or aryl groups bonded to the carbonyl group. The locations of substituents are indicated by Greek letters, a a¢, b b¢ and so on beginning with the carbon atoms next to the carbonyl group, indicated as aa¢. Some ketones have historical common names, the simplest dimethyl ketone is called acetone. Alkyl phenyl ketones are usually named by adding the name of acyl group as prefix to the word phenone. For example (b) IUPAC names The IUPAC names of open chain aliphatic aldehydes and ketones are derived from the names of the corresponding alkanes by replacing the ending –e with –al and –one respectively. In case of aldehydes the longest carbon chain is numbered starting from the carbon of the aldehyde group while in case of ketones the numbering begins from the end nearer to the carbonyl group. The substituents are prefixed in alphabetical order along with numerals indicating their positions in the carbon chain. The same applies to cyclic ketones, where the carbonyl carbon is numbered one. When the aldehyde group is attached to a ring, the suffix carbaldehyde is added after the full name of the cycloalkane. The numbering of the ring carbon atoms start from the carbon atom attached to the aldehyde group. The name of the simplest aromatic aldehyde carrying the aldehyde group on a benzene ring is benzenecarbaldehyde. However, the common name benzaldehyde is also accepted by IUPAC. Other aromatic aldehydes are hence named as substituted benzaldehydes. 229 Aldehydes, Ketones and Carboxylic Acids Reprint 2024-25 The common and IUPAC names of some aldehydes and ketones are given in Table 8.1. Table 8.1: Common and IUPAC Names of Some Aldehydes and Ketones Structure Common name IUPAC name Aldehydes HCHO Formaldehyde Methanal CH3CHO Acetaldehyde Ethanal (CH3)2CHCHO Isobutyraldehyde 2-Methylpropanal g-Methylcyclohexanecarbaldehyde 3-Methylcyclohexanecarbaldehyde CH3CH(OCH3)CHO a-Methoxypropionaldehyde 2-Methoxypropanal CH3CH2CH2CH2CHO Valeraldehyde Pentanal CH2=CHCHO Acrolein Prop-2-enal Phthaldehyde Benzene-1,2-dicarbaldehyde 3-Bromobenzenecarbaldehyde or m-Bromobenzaldehyde  3-Bromobenzaldehyde Ketones CH3COCH2CH2CH3 Methyl n-propyl ketone Pentan-2-one (CH3)2CHCOCH(CH3)2 Diisopropyl ketone 2,4-Dimethylpentan-3-one a-Methylcyclohexanone 2-Methylcyclohexanone (CH3)2C=CHCOCH3 Mesityl oxide 4-Methylpent-3-en-2-one Chemistry 230 Reprint 2024-25 2 8.1.2 Structure of The carbonyl carbon atom is sp -hybridised and forms three sigma (s) the bonds. The fourth valence electron of carbon remains in its p-orbital Carbonyl and forms a p-bond with oxygen by overlap with p-orbital of an oxygen. Group In addition, the oxygen atom also has two non bonding electron pairs. Thus, the carbonyl carbon and the three atoms attached to it lie in the same plane and the p-electron cloud is above and below this plane. The bond angles are approximately 120° as expected of a trigonal coplanar structure (Figure 8.1). π Fig.8.1  Orbital diagram for the formation of carbonyl group The carbon-oxygen double bond is polarised due to higher electronegativity of oxygen relative to carbon. Hence, the carbonyl carbon is an electrophilic (Lewis acid), and carbonyl oxygen, a nucleophilic (Lewis base) centre. Carbonyl compounds have substantial dipole moments and are polar than ethers. The high polarity of the carbonyl group is explained on the basis of resonance involving a neutral (A) and a dipolar (B) structures as shown. Intext Questions 8.1 Write the structures of the following compounds. (i) a-Methoxypropionaldehyde (ii) 3-Hydroxybutanal (iii) 2-Hydroxycyclopentane carbaldehyde (iv) 4-Oxopentanal (v) Di-sec. butyl ketone (vi) 4-Fluoroacetophenone 8.2 Preparation of Aldehydes Some important methods for the preparation of aldehydes and Ketones and ketones are as follows: 8.2.1 Preparation 1. By oxidation of alcohols of Aldehydes and ketones are generally prepared by oxidation of primary Aldehydes and secondary alcohols, respectively (Unit 7, Class XII). and Ketones 2. By dehydrogenation of alcohols This method is suitable for volatile alcohols and is of industrial application. In this method alcohol vapours are passed over heavy metal catalysts (Ag or Cu). Primary and secondary alcohols give aldehydes and ketones, respectively (Unit 7, Class XII). 3. From hydrocarbons (i) By ozonolysis of alkenes: As we know, ozonolysis of alkenes followed by reaction with zinc dust and water gives aldehydes, 231 Aldehydes, Ketones and Carboxylic Acids Reprint 2024-25 ketones or a mixture of both depending on the substitution pattern of the alkene (Unit 9, Class XI). (ii) By hydration of alkynes: Addition of water to ethyne in the presence of H2SO4  and HgSO4 gives acetaldehyde. All other alkynes give ketones in this reaction (Unit 9, Class XI). 8.2.2 Preparation 1. From acyl chloride (acid chloride) of Acyl chloride (acid chloride) is hydrogenated over catalyst, palladium Aldehydes on barium sulphate. This reaction is called Rosenmund reduction. 2. From nitriles and esters Nitriles are reduced to corresponding imine with stannous chloride in the presence of hydrochloric acid, which on hydrolysis give corresponding aldehyde. This reaction is called Stephen reaction. Alternatively, nitriles are selectively reduced by diisobutylaluminium hydride, (DIBAL-H) to imines followed by hydrolysis to aldehydes: Similarly, esters are also reduced to aldehydes with DIBAL-H. 3. From hydrocarbons Aromatic aldehydes (benzaldehyde and its derivatives) are prepared from aromatic hydrocarbons by the following methods: (i) By oxidation of methylbenzene Strong oxidising agents oxidise toluene and its derivatives to benzoic acids. However, it is possible to stop the oxidation at the aldehyde stage with suitable reagents that convert the methyl group to an intermediate that is difficult to oxidise further. The following methods are used for this purpose. (a) Use of chromyl chloride (CrO2Cl2): Chromyl chloride oxidises methyl group to a chromium complex, which on hydrolysis gives corresponding benzaldehyde. Chemistry 232 Reprint 2024-25 This reaction is called Etard reaction. (b) Use of chromic oxide (CrO3): Toluene or substituted toluene is converted to benzylidene diacetate on treating with chromic oxide in acetic anhydride. The benzylidene diacetate can be hydrolysed to corresponding benzaldehyde with aqueous acid. (ii) By side chain chlorination followed by hydrolysis Side chain chlorination of toluene gives benzal chloride, which on hydrolysis gives benzaldehyde. This is a commercial method of manufacture of benzaldehyde. (iii) By Gatterman – Koch reaction When benzene or its derivative is treated with carbon monoxide and hydrogen chloride in the presence of anhydrous aluminium chloride or cuprous chloride, it gives benzaldehyde or substituted benzaldehyde. This reaction is known as Gatterman-Koch reaction. 8.2.3 Preparation 1. From acyl chlorides of Ketones Treatment of acyl chlorides with dialkylcadmium, prepared by the reaction of cadmium chloride with Grignard reagent, gives ketones. 233 Aldehydes, Ketones and Carboxylic Acids Reprint 2024-25 2. From nitriles Treating a nitrile with Grignard reagent followed by hydrolysis yields a ketone. 3. From benzene or substituted benzenes When benzene or substituted benzene is treated with acid chloride in the presence of anhydrous aluminium chloride, it affords the corresponding ketone. This reaction is known as Friedel-Crafts acylation reaction. Example 8.1 Give names of the reagents to bring about the following transformations: (i) Hexan-1-ol to hexanal (ii) Cyclohexanol to cyclohexanone (iii) p-Fluorotoluene to (iv) Ethanenitrile to ethanal p-fluorobenzaldehyde (v) Allyl alcohol to propenal (vi) But-2-ene to ethanal Solution (i) C H NH+CrO Cl-(PCC) (ii) Anhydrous CrO 5 5 3 3 (iii) CrO  in the presence (iv) (Diisobutyl)aluminium 3 of acetic anhydride/ hydride (DIBAL-H) 1. CrO Cl  2. HOH 2 2 (v) PCC (vi) O /H O-Zn dust 3 2 Intext Question 8.2 Write the structures of products of the following reactions; (C6H5CH2)2 Cd + 2 CH3 COCl (i) (ii) CH3 2+ 1.CrO2Cl2 (iii) H C C C H Hg , H2SO4 3 (iv) 2.H3O + NO2 Chemistry 234 Reprint 2024-25 8.3 Physical The physical properties of aldehydes and ketones are described as follows. Properties Methanal is a gas at room temperature. Ethanal is a volatile liquid. Other aldehydes and ketones are liquid or solid at room temperature. The boiling points of aldehydes and ketones are higher than hydrocarbons and ethers of comparable molecular masses. It is due to weak molecular association in aldehydes and ketones arising out of the dipole-dipole interactions. Also, their boiling points are lower than those of alcohols of similar molecular masses due to absence of intermolecular hydrogen bonding. The following compounds of molecular masses 58 and 60 are ranked in order of increasing boiling points. b.p.(K) Molecular Mass n-Butane 273 58 Methoxyethane 281 60 Propanal 322 58 Acetone 329 58 Propan-1-ol 370 60 The lower members of aldehydes and ketones such as methanal, ethanal and propanone are miscible with water in all proportions, because they form hydrogen bond with water. However, the solubility of aldehydes and ketones decreases rapidly on increasing the length of alkyl chain. All aldehydes and ketones are fairly soluble in organic solvents like benzene, ether, methanol, chloroform, etc. The lower aldehydes have sharp pungent odours. As the size of the molecule increases, the odour becomes less pungent and more fragrant. In fact, many naturally occurring aldehydes and ketones are used in the blending of perfumes and flavouring agents. Arrange the following compounds in the increasing order of their Example 8.2 boiling points: CH CH CH CHO, CH CH CH CH OH, H C -O-C H , CH CH CH CH 3 2 2 3 2 2 2 5 2 2 5 3 2 2 3 The molecular masses of these compounds are in the range of 72 to Solution 74. Since only butan-1-ol molecules are associated due to extensive intermolecular hydrogen bonding, therefore, the boiling point of butan-1-ol would be the highest. Butanal is more polar than ethoxyethane. Therefore, the intermolecular dipole-dipole attraction is stronger in the former. n-Pentane molecules have only weak van der Waals forces. Hence  increasing order of boiling points  of the given compounds is as follows: CH CH CH CH  < H C -O-C H  < CH CH CH CHO < CH CH CH CH OH 3 2 2 3 5 2 2 5 3 2 2 3 2 2 2 235 Aldehydes, Ketones and Carboxylic Acids Reprint 2024-25 Intext Question 8.3 Arrange the following compounds in increasing order of their boiling points. CH CHO, CH CH OH, CH OCH , CH CH CH 3 3 2 3 3 3 2 3 8.4 Chemical Since aldehydes and ketones both possess the carbonyl functional group, they undergo similar chemical reactions. Reactions 1. Nucleophilic addition reactions Contrary to electrophilic addition reactions observed in alkenes, the aldehydes and ketones undergo nucleophilic addition reactions. (i) Mechanism of nucleophilic addition reactions A nucleophile attacks the electrophilic carbon atom of the polar carbonyl group from a direction approximately perpendicular 2 to the plane of sp  hybridised orbitals of carbonyl carbon (Fig. 2 3 8.2). The hybridisation of carbon changes from sp  to sp  in this process, and a tetrahedral alkoxide intermediate is produced. This intermediate captures a proton from the reaction medium to give the electrically neutral product. The net result is – + addition of Nu  and H across the carbon oxygen double bond as shown in Fig. 8.2. Fig.8.2:  Nucleophilic attack on carbonyl carbon (ii) Reactivity Aldehydes are generally more reactive than ketones in nucleophilic addition reactions due to steric and electronic reasons. Sterically, the presence of two relatively large substituents in ketones hinders the approach of nucleophile to carbonyl carbon than in aldehydes having only one such substituent. Electronically, aldehydes are more reactive than ketones because two alkyl groups reduce the electrophilicity of the carbonyl carbon more effectively than in former. Example 8.3 Would you expect benzaldehyde to be more reactive or less reactive in nucleophilic addition reactions than propanal? Explain your answer. Solution The carbon atom of the carbonyl group of benzaldehyde is less electrophilic than carbon atom of the carbonyl group present in propanal. The polarity of the carbonyl group is reduced in benzaldehyde due to resonance as shown below and hence it is less reactive than propanal. Chemistry 236 Reprint 2024-25 (iii) Some important examples of nucleophilic addition and nucleophilic addition-elimination reactions: (a) Addition of hydrogen cyanide (HCN): Aldehydes and ketones react with hydrogen cyanide (HCN) to yield cyanohydrins. This reaction occurs very slowly with pure HCN. Therefore, it is catalysed - by a base and  the generated cyanide ion (CN ) being a stronger nucleophile readily adds to carbonyl compounds to yield corresponding cyanohydrin. Cyanohydrins are useful synthetic intermediates. (b) Addition of sodium hydrogensulphite: Sodium hydrogensulphite adds to aldehydes and ketones to form the addition products. The position of the equilibrium lies largely to the right hand side for most aldehydes and to the left for most ketones due to steric reasons. The hydrogensulphite addition compound is water soluble and can be converted back to the original carbonyl compound by treating it with dilute mineral acid or alkali. Therefore, these are useful for separation and purification of aldehydes. (c) Addition of Grignard reagents:   (refer Unit 7, Class XII). (d) Addition of alcohols:  Aldehydes react with one equivalent of monohydric alcohol in the presence of dry hydrogen chloride to yield alkoxyalcohol intermediate, known as hemiacetals, which further react with one more molecule of alcohol to give a gem-dialkoxy compound known as acetal as shown in the reaction. Ketones react with ethylene glycol under similar conditions to form cyclic products known as ethylene glycol ketals. Dry hydrogen chloride protonates the oxygen of the carbonyl compounds and therefore, increases the electrophilicity of the carbonyl carbon facilitating 237 Aldehydes, Ketones and Carboxylic Acids Reprint 2024-25 the nucleophilic attack of ethylene glycol. Acetals and ketals are hydrolysed with aqueous mineral acids to yield corresponding aldehydes and ketones respectively. (e) Addition of ammonia and its derivatives:  Nucleophiles, such as ammonia and its derivatives H N-Z add to the carbonyl 2 group of aldehydes and ketones. The reaction is reversible and catalysed by acid. The equilibrium favours the product formation due to rapid dehydration of the intermediate to form >C=N-Z. Z = Alkyl, aryl, OH, NH2, C6H5NH, NHCONH2, etc. Table 8.2: Some N-Substituted Derivatives of Aldehydes and Ketones (>C=N-Z) Z Reagent name Carbonyl derivative Product name -H Ammonia Imine -R Amine Substituted imine (Schiff’s base) —OH Hydroxylamine Oxime —NH2 Hydrazine Hydrazone Phenylhydrazine Phenylhydrazone 2,4-Dinitrophenyl- 2,4 Dinitrophenylhydrazine hydrazone Semicarbazide Semicarbazone * 2,4-DNP-derivatives are yellow, orange or red solids, useful for characterisation of aldehydes and ketones. 2. Reduction (i) Reduction to alcohols: Aldehydes and ketones are reduced to primary and secondary alcohols respectively by sodium borohydride (NaBH4) or lithium aluminium hydride (LiAlH4) as well as by catalytic hydrogenation (Unit 7, Class XII). (ii) Reduction to hydrocarbons: The carbonyl group of aldehydes and ketones is reduced to CH2 group on treatment with zincamalgam and concentrated hydrochloric acid [Clemmensen Chemistry 238 Reprint 2024-25 reduction] or with hydrazine followed by heating with sodium or  potassium hydroxide in high boiling solvent such as ethylene glycol (Wolff-Kishner reduction). 3. Oxidation Aldehydes differ from ketones in their oxidation reactions. Aldehydes Bernhard Tollens are easily oxidised to carboxylic acids on treatment with common (1841-1918) was a oxidising agents like nitric acid, potassium permanganate, potassium Professor of Chemistry dichromate, etc. Even mild oxidising agents, mainly Tollens’ reagent at the University of and Fehlings’ reagent also oxidise aldehydes. Gottingen, Germany. Ketones are generally oxidised under vigorous conditions, i.e., strong oxidising agents and at elevated temperatures. Their oxidation involves carbon-carbon bond cleavage to afford a mixture of carboxylic acids having lesser number of carbon atoms than the parent ketone. The mild oxidising agents given below are used to distinguish aldehydes from ketones: (i) Tollens’ test:  On warming an aldehyde with freshly prepared ammoniacal silver nitrate solution (Tollens’ reagent), a bright silver mirror is produced due to the formation of silver metal. The aldehydes are oxidised to corresponding carboxylate anion. The reaction occurs in alkaline medium. (ii) Fehling’s test: Fehling reagent comprises of two solutions, Fehling solution A and Fehling solution B. Fehling solution A is aqueous copper sulphate and Fehling solution B is alkaline sodium potassium tartarate (Rochelle salt). These two solutions are mixed in equal amounts before test. On heating an aldehyde with Fehling’s reagent, a reddish brown precipitate is obtained. Aldehydes are oxidised to corresponding carboxylate anion. Aromatic aldehydes do not respond to this test. 239 Aldehydes, Ketones and Carboxylic Acids Reprint 2024-25 (iii) Oxidation of methyl ketones by haloform reaction: Aldehydes and ketones having at least one methyl group linked to the carbonyl carbon atom (methyl ketones) are oxidised by sodium hypohalite to sodium salts of corresponding carboxylic acids having one carbon atom less than that of carbonyl compound. The methyl group is converted to haloform. This oxidation does not affect a carbon-carbon double bond, if present in the molecule. Iodoform reaction with sodium hypoiodite is also used for detection of CH3CO group or CH3CH(OH) group which produces CH3CO group on oxidation. Example 8.4 An organic compound (A) with molecular formula C H O forms an 8 8 orange-red precipitate with 2,4-DNP reagent and gives yellow precipitate on heating with iodine in the presence of sodium hydroxide. It neither reduces Tollens’ or Fehlings’ reagent, nor does it decolourise bromine water or Baeyer’s reagent. On drastic oxidation with chromic acid, it gives a carboxylic acid (B) having molecular formula C H O . Identify the compounds (A) and (B) and explain the 7 6 2 reactions involved. Solution (A) forms 2,4-DNP derivative. Therefore, it is an aldehyde or a ketone. Since it does not reduce Tollens’ or Fehling reagent, (A) must be a ketone. (A) responds to iodoform test. Therefore, it should be a methyl ketone. The molecular formula of (A) indicates high degree of unsaturation, yet it does not decolourise bromine water or Baeyer’s reagent. This indicates the presence of unsaturation due to an aromatic ring. Compound (B), being an oxidation product of a ketone should be a carboxylic acid. The molecular formula of (B) indicates that it should be benzoic acid and compound (A) should, therefore, be a monosubstituted aromatic methyl ketone. The molecular formula of (A) indicates that it should be phenyl methyl ketone (acetophenone). Reactions are as follows: Chemistry 240 Reprint 2024-25 4. Reactions due to a-hydrogen Acidity of a-hydrogens of aldehydes and ketones: The aldehydes and ketones undergo a number of reactions due to the acidic nature of a-hydrogen. The acidity of a-hydrogen atoms of carbonyl compounds is due to the strong electron withdrawing effect of the carbonyl group and resonance stabilisation of the conjugate base. (i) Aldol condensation:  Aldehydes and ketones having at least one a-hydrogen undergo a reaction in the presence of dilute alkali as catalyst to form b-hydroxy aldehydes (aldol) or b-hydroxy ketones (ketol), respectively. This is known as Aldol reaction. The name aldol is derived from the names of the two functional groups, aldehyde and alcohol, present in the products. The aldol and ketol readily lose water to give a,b-unsaturated carbonyl compounds which are aldol condensation products and the reaction is called Aldol condensation. Though ketones give ketols (compounds containing a keto and alcohol groups), the general name aldol condensation still applies to the reactions of ketones due to their similarity with aldehydes. 241 Aldehydes, Ketones and Carboxylic Acids Reprint 2024-25 (ii) Cross aldol condensation:  When aldol condensation is carried out between two different aldehydes and / or ketones, it is called cross aldol condensation. If both of them contain a-hydrogen atoms, it gives a mixture of four products. This is illustrated below by aldol reaction of a mixture of ethanal and propanal. Ketones can also be used as one component in the cross aldol reactions. 5. Other reactions (i) Cannizzaro reaction: Aldehydes which do not have an a-hydrogen atom, undergo self oxidation and reduction (disproportionation) reaction on heating with concentrated alkali. In this reaction, one molecule of the aldehyde is reduced to alcohol while another is oxidised to carboxylic acid salt. D D Chemistry 242 Reprint 2024-25 (ii) Electrophilic substitution reaction: Aromatic aldehydes and ketones undergo electrophilic substitution at the ring in which the carbonyl group acts as a deactivating and meta-directing group. Intext Questions 8.4 Arrange the following compounds in increasing order of their reactivity in nucleophilic addition reactions. (i) Ethanal, Propanal, Propanone, Butanone. (ii) Benzaldehyde, p-Tolualdehyde, p-Nitrobenzaldehyde, Acetophenone. Hint: Consider steric effect and electronic effect. 8.5 Predict the products of the following reactions: (i) (ii) (iii) (iv) 8.5 Uses of In chemical industry aldehydes and ketones are used as solvents, Aldehydes starting materials and reagents for the synthesis of other products. Formaldehyde is well known as formalin (40%) solution used to preserve and Ketones biological specimens and to prepare bakelite (a phenol-formaldehyde resin), urea-formaldehyde glues and other polymeric products. Acetaldehyde is used primarily as a starting material in the manufacture of acetic acid, ethyl acetate, vinyl acetate, polymers and drugs. Benzaldehyde is used in perfumery and in dye industries. Acetone and ethyl methyl ketone are common industrial solvents. Many aldehydes and ketones, e.g., butyraldehyde, vanillin, acetophenone, camphor, etc. are well known for their odours and flavours. 243 Aldehydes, Ketones and Carboxylic Acids Reprint 2024-25 Carboxylic Acids Carbon compounds containing a carboxyl functional group, –COOH are called carboxylic acids. The carboxyl group, consists of a carbonyl group attached to a hydroxyl group, hence its name carboxyl. Carboxylic acids may be aliphatic (RCOOH) or aromatic (ArCOOH) depending on the group, alkyl or aryl, attached to carboxylic carbon. Large  number of carboxylic acids are found in nature. Some higher members of aliphatic carboxylic acids (C12 – C18) known as fatty acids, occur in natural fats as esters of glycerol. Carboxylic acids serve as starting material for several other important organic compounds such as anhydrides, esters, acid chlorides, amides, etc. 8.6 Nomenclature and Structure of Carboxyl Group 8.6.1 Since carboxylic acids are amongst the earliest organic compounds to Nomenclature be isolated from nature, a large number of them are known by their common names. The common names end with the suffix –ic acid and have been derived from Latin or Greek names of their natural sources. For example, formic acid (HCOOH) was first obtained from red ants (Latin: formica means ant), acetic acid (CH3COOH) from vinegar (Latin: acetum, means vinegar), butyric acid (CH3CH2CH2COOH) from rancid butter (Latin: butyrum, means butter). In the IUPAC system, aliphatic carboxylic acids are named by replacing the ending –e in the name of the corresponding alkane with – oic acid. In numbering the carbon chain, the carboxylic carbon is numbered one. For naming compounds containing more than one carboxyl group, the alkyl chain leaving carboxyl groups is numbered and the number of carboxyl groups is indicated by adding the multiplicative prefix, dicarboxylic acid, tricarboxylic acid, etc. to the name of parent alkyl chain. The position of –COOH groups are indicated by the arabic numeral before the multiplicative prefix.  Some of the carboxylic acids along with their common and IUPAC names are listed in Table 8.3. Table 8.3 Names and Structures of Some Carboxylic Acids Structure Common name IUPAC name HCOOH Formic acid Methanoic acid CH COOH Acetic acid Ethanoic acid 3 CH CH COOH Propionic acid Propanoic acid 3 2 CH CH CH COOH Butyric acid Butanoic acid 3 2 2 (CH ) CHCOOH Isobutyric acid 2-Methylpropanoic acid 3 2 HOOC-COOH Oxalic acid Ethanedioic acid HOOC -CH -COOH Malonic acid Propanedioic acid 2 HOOC -(CH ) -COOH Succinic acid Butanedioic acid 2 2 HOOC -(CH ) -COOH Glutaric acid Pentanedioic acid 2 3 HOOC -(CH ) -COOH Adipic acid Hexanedioic acid 2 4 HOOC -CH -CH(COOH)-CH -COOH Tricarballylic acid Propane-1, 2, 32 2 or carballylic acid tricarboxylic acid Chemistry 244 Reprint 2024-25 Benzoic acid Benzenecarboxylic acid (Benzoic acid) Phenylacetic acid 2-Phenylethanoic acid Phthalic acid Benzene-1, 2-dicarboxylic acid 8.6.2 Structure In carboxylic acids, the bonds to the carboxyl carbon lie in one plane of Carboxyl and are separated by about 120°. The carboxylic carbon is less Group electrophilic than carbonyl carbon because of the possible resonance structure shown below: + Intext Question 8.6 Give the IUPAC names of the following compounds: (i) Ph CH CH COOH (ii) (CH ) C=CHCOOH 2 2 3 2 CH3 (iii) COOH (iv) 8.7 Methods of Some important methods of preparation of carboxylic acids are as follows. Preparation 1. From primary alcohols and aldehydes of Carboxylic Primary alcohols are readily oxidised to carboxylic acids with common Acids oxidising agents such as potassium permanganate (KMnO4) in neutral, acidic or alkaline media or by potassium dichromate (K2Cr2O7) and chromium trioxide (CrO3) in acidic media (Jones reagent). Jones reagent 245 Aldehydes, Ketones and Carboxylic Acids Reprint 2024-25 Carboxylic acids are also prepared from aldehydes by the use of mild oxidising agents (Section 8.4). 2. From alkylbenzenes Aromatic carboxylic acids can be prepared by vigorous oxidation of alkyl benzenes with chromic acid or acidic or alkaline potassium permanganate. The entire side chain is oxidised to the carboxyl group irrespective of length of the side chain. Primary and secondary alkyl groups are oxidised in this manner while tertiary group is not affected. Suitably substituted alkenes are also oxidised to carboxylic acids with these oxidising reagents. 3. From nitriles and amides Nitriles are hydrolysed to amides and then to acids in the presence of  + H  or OH as catalyst. Mild reaction conditions are used to stop the reaction at the amide stage. 4. From Grignard reagents Grignard reagents react with carbon dioxide (dry ice) to form salts of carboxylic acids which in turn give corresponding carboxylic acids after  acidification with mineral acid. As we know, the Grignard reagents and nitriles can be prepared from alkyl halides (refer Unit 6, Class XII). The above methods Chemistry 246 Reprint 2024-25 (3 and 4) are useful for converting alkyl halides into corresponding carboxylic acids having one carbon atom more than that present in alkyl halides (ascending the series). 5. From acyl halides and anhydrides Acid chlorides when hydrolysed with water give carboxylic acids or more readily hydrolysed with aqueous base to give carboxylate ions which on acidification provide corresponding carboxylic acids. Anhydrides on the other hand are hydrolysed to corresponding acid(s) with water.