Part I Foundations of Business 2024-25 Chapter 1 .indd   1 13-01-2021   09:40:02 ChaPter 1 Business, Trade and CommerCe LEARNING OBJECTIVES After studying this chapter, the learner: i. Appreciates  the contribution of business activities in the growth and development of an economy; ii. Discusses the concept and objectives of business; iii. Categorises business activities into occupation, profession, and employment iv. Classifies industry in different types; v. Explains Risk and Profit as a reward of Risk; and vi. Enumerates factors for starting a business. 2024-25 Chapter 1 .indd   2 13-01-2021   09:40:02 BUSINESS, TRADE AND COMMERCE 3 Imran, Manpreet, Joseph and Priyanka have been classmates in Class X. After their exams are over, they happen to meet at a common friend Ruchita’s house. Just when they were sharing their experiences of examination days, Ruchika’s father Raghuraj Chaudhary intervenes and asks about their well-being. He also enquires about their career plans. But none of them had a definite reply. Raghuraj who himself is a successful businessman tells them about business as a career opportunity. Joseph gets excited by the idea and says “yes, business is really good for making lots of money”. Raghuraj tells them that ‘there is a lot more to business than merely money’. Business activities lead to growth and development of any country, he added. He further tells them that the roots of business activities can be traced back to ancient times and how trading helps in the prosperity of the Indian subcontinent. Priyanka said that they have read about the Silk Route in their history textbooks. Raghuraj then gets busy with his day-to-day tasks. However, the four classmates begin raising questions. The conversation of the four classmates focused on how trading activities were conducted during ancient times. How far can the roots of trading activities be traced? Why was the Indian subcontinent referred to as ‘Swaran Bharat and Swaran Dweep’ by the then travellers to India? What made Columbus and Vasco da Gama undertake journeys to locate India? They decided to meet the commerce teacher of their school to find out answers to many such questions about the development, nature and purpose of business. 1.1 inTroduCTion distribution and exchange so that the All human beings, wherever they may needs and wants of customers are be, require different types of goods satisfied. Business is a major economic and services to satisfy their needs. activity which is concerned with the If we look around, we observe people production and sale of goods and require different types of products services required by people. Business and services to satisfy their needs. is central to our lives. Although our How do they buy them? They go to the lives are also influenced by many other market, either physical or electronic institutions in modern society, such as over internet, where they find variety of schools, colleges, hospitals, political shops and sellers offering the required parties and religious bodies; business commodities and choose the best has a major influence on our daily which they require. lives. It, therefore, becomes important Have you ever wondered how do that we understand the concept, these products and services are made nature and purpose of business. available in the market. The necessity Business starts with production of supplying goods and services is and end with consumption. Making the done by different set of people engaged finished products reach the consumer in various economic activities such involves a series of steps. The work of as production, manufacturing and production of goods is covered under 2024-25 Chapter 1 .indd   3 13-01-2021   09:40:02 4 BUSINESS  STUDIES Industry and the remaining activities The goods were traded both belong to commerce. In a nutshell we internally and to the foreign lands, call them ‘Business’ which is a wider which generated surplus income. As term and includes Industry, trade and a result, the people were engaged commerce. in various economic activities such as agriculture and domestication TRANSFER OF GOODS AND SERVICES of animals, weaving cotton, dyeing (Monetary versus Barter) fabrics, making clay pots, utensils and handicrafts, sculpting, cottage Exchange Production industries, masonry, etc. Family or Purchase based workshops [karkhanas], for manufacturing, were important components of economic life. This ECONOMIC money was channelised into further ACTIVITIES investment, and led to the dominant growth of indigenous banking system to finance the trading activities. Distribution Consumption An example of it is the use of age old Hundi and Chitties (used in southern region). These were used DIVISION OF INCOME SATISFACTION as documents to facilitate transfer of AMONG FACTORS OF OF NEEDS money from one hand to another for PRODUCTION AND WANTS trading activities. As an instrument of exchange it involved a contract 1.1.1 Role of Business in the which — (i) warrant the payment of Development of Economy money, the promise or order which is Business which includes trade and unconditional (ii) capable of change commerce have played a vital role through transfer by valid negotiation. since times memorial. You have Why there was a need to create an studied in your earlier classes that our intangible form of exchange of money. country, India, had a golden past and It was so because travelling long the trading activities had a significant distances either by land or sea involved contribution to its prosperity and risk of theft and robbery. Hundi which gains. The archaeological evidences literally means ‘to collect’ was written have shown that trading activities were in vernacular language and facilitated the mainstay of the economy in ancient the safe transfer of money between times which were carried out by both parties and helped promotion of water and land routes. Silk route and trading activities. maritime trade were quite prominent The emergence of credit transactions in transporting goods and commodities and availability of loans and advances for trading purposes. enhanced commercial operations. The 2024-25 Chapter 1 .indd   4 13-01-2021   09:40:02 BUSINESS, TRADE AND COMMERCE 5 Hundi as practised by Indian Merchant Communities Dhani-jog Darshani Payable to any person—no liability over who received payment. Sah-jog Darshani Payable to a specif ic person, someone ‘respectable’. Liability over who received payment. Firman-jog Darshani Hundi made payable to order. Dekhan-har Darshani Payable to the presenter or bearer. Dhani-jog Muddati Payable to any person—no liability over who received payment, but payment over a fixed term. Firman-jog Muddati Hundi made payable to order following a fixed term. Jokhmi Muddati Drawn against dispatched goods. If goods lost in transit, the drawer or holder bears the coasts, and the Drawee carries no liability. Indian subcontinent enjoyed the fruits cotton,  parrot,  live animals and of favourable balance of trade, where animal products, etc. Major imports exports exceeded imports with large were Horses, animal products, Chinese margins and the indigenous banking silks, linen, wine, gold, silver, copper, system benefitted the manufacturers, etc. There were all kinds of towns— traders and merchants with additional port towns, manufacturing towns, capital funds for expansion and mercantile towns, the sacred centres, development.  Commercial  and and pilgrimage towns. Their existence Industrial banks later evolved to is an index of prosperity of merchant finance trade and commerce and communities and professional classes. agricultural banks to provide both Business activities led to the short and long-term loans to finance growth of different aids to trade such agriculturists. as transportation, banking, finance Many leading trade centres were and communication which grew the developed in ancient times for the import prospects of trading activities. With the and export of goods, some of them active contribution of Indian traders being Patliputra, Peshawar, Taxila, and other merchant communities, the Indraprastha, Mithila, Maduram, Indian sub-continent was popularly Surat, Ujjain, Kanchi, Mithila. Major called ‘Swaran Bhoomi and Swaran exports items were Spices, wheat, Deep’ in the writings of many travellers, sugar, indigo, opium, sesame oil, such as Megasthenes, Faxian (FaHien), 2024-25 Chapter 1 .indd   5 13-01-2021   09:40:02 6 BUSINESS  STUDIES Xuanzang (Huen Tsang), Al Beruni Between the 1st and the 7th (11th century), IbnBatuta (11th centuries CE, India is estimated to century), Frenchman Francois (17th have the largest economy of the ancient and medieval world, controlling about century) and others. They repeatedly one-third and one-fourth of the world’s refer to the prosperity of the country. wealth (timeline). 1 AD: 32% (the largest  1000 AD: 32% (the largest 1500 AD: 24.36% (second in regional contribution) regional contribution) regional share) 1850 AD: 5–10% 1700–1750 AD: 25% of world’s 1700 AD: 1600 AD: industrial output 24.46% 24.41% 1870 AD: 9.2% (world income 1900 AD: 2% (global 1913 AD: 5.4% British Empire) industrial output) (British Empire) 1991 AD: Economic 1973 AD:  1952 AD: 3.8% of the liberalisation 3.1% world income Source: Angus Maddison (2001 and 2003), The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective, OECD, Paris; Angus Maddison, The World Economy, Historical Statistics Major Trade Centres in ancient times 1. Pataliputra: Known as Patna today. It was not only a commercial town, but also a major centre for export of stones. 2. Peshawar: It was an important exporting centre for wool and for the import of horses. It had a huge share in commercial transactions between India, China and Rome in the first century A.D. 3. Taxila: It served as a major centre on the important land route between India and Central Asia. It was also a city of financial and commercial banks. The city occupied an important place as a Buddhist centre of learning. The famous Taxila University flourished here. 4. Indraprastha: It was the commercial junction on the royal road where most routes leading to the east, west, south and north converged. 5. Mathura: It was an emporium of trade and people here subsisted on commerce. Many routes from South India touched Mathura and Broach. 6. Varanasi: It was well placed as it lay both on the Gangetic route and on the highway that linked North with the East. It grew as a major centre of textile industry and became famous for beautiful gold silk cloth and sandalwood workmanship. It had links with Taxila and Bharuch. 2024-25 Chapter 1 .indd   6 13-01-2021   09:40:02 BUSINESS, TRADE AND COMMERCE 7 7. Mithila: The traders of Mithila crossed the seas by boats, through the Bay of Bengal to the South China Sea, and traded at ports on the islands of Java, Sumatra and Borneo. Mithila established trading colonies in South China, especially in Yunnan. 8. Ujjain: Agate, carnelian, muslin and mallow cloth were exported from Ujjain to different centres. It also had trade relations through the land route with Taxila and Peshawar. 9. Surat: It was the emporium of western trade during the Mughal period. Textiles of Surat were famous for their gold borders (zari). It is noteworthy that Surat hundi was honoured in far off markets of Egypt and Iran. 10. Kanchi: Today known as Kanchipuram, it was here that the Chinese used to come in foreign ships to purchase pearls, glass and rare stones and in return they sold gold and silk. 11. Madura: It was the capital of the Pandayas who controlled the pearl fisheries of the Gulf of Mannar. It attracted foreign merchants, particularly Romans, for carrying out overseas trade. 12. Broach: It was the greatest seat of commerce in Western India. It was situated on the banks of river Narmada and was linked with all important marts by roadways. 13. Kaveripatta: Also known as Kaveripatnam, it was scientific in its construction as a city and provided loading, unloading and strong facilities of merchandise. Foreign traders had their headquarters in this city. It was a convenient place for trade with Malaysia, Indonesia, China and the Far East. It was the centre of trade for perfumes, cosmetics,  scents, silk, wool, cotton, corals, pearls, gold and precious stones; and also for ship building. 14. Tamralipti: It was one of the greatest ports connected both by sea and land with the West and the Far East. It was linked by road to Banaras and Taxila. With the emergence of the British development with the objective of Empireroots in India the east india achieving a self-reliant socialistic company used revenues generated pattern of society. The measures taken by the provinces under its rule for towards the same was characterised purchasing Indian raw materials, by centralised economic planning and spices and goods. This changed the emphasis on public investment in condition of the Indian economy from basic and key industries. being an exporter of processed goods Due importance was given to to the exporter of raw materials and the  es tab l ishment  o f  modern buyer of manufactured goods. industries, modern technological After independence the process and scientific institutes, space and of rebuilding the economy started nuclear programmes. But lack of and India embarked on planned capital formation, rise in population, 2024-25 Chapter 1 .indd   7 13-01-2021   09:40:02 8 BUSINESS  STUDIES weak financial system, inadequate The Indian economy is emerging infrastructure and high huge as one of the faster growing economies expenditure on defence, high fiscal in the world today and a preferred FDI deficits and continuous deficits in destination. Rising incomes, savings, balance of payments were evident and investment opportunities, increased international community’s confidence domestic consumption and younger in India’s ability to manage its economy population ensures growth for decades was severely affected. The balance of to come. The high growth sectors have payment situation was precarious. been identified, which are likely to As a result, India agreed to economic grow at a rapid pace and the recent liberalisation in 1991. initiatives of the Government of India A three pronged approach of such as ‘Make in India’, Skill India’, stabilisation, restructuring and ‘Digital India’ is expected to help the globalisation of Indian economy was economy in terms of exports and adopted to address the changes in imports with steady and sustainable economic and business scenario and trade balance. its integration with global economy. Government of India announced major Activity economic reform packages aimed at Did you notice how business plays restoring the growth momentum in the a major role in the growth and economy. Major policy changes were development of any nation and why effected since 1991 w.r.t., fiscal, business is regarded as a backbone of monetary, trade, industry, agriculture, the Economy? Discuss in class. infrastructure, foreign exchange and foreign investment since 1991. 1.2 ConCepT of Business The term business is derived from the word ‘busy’. Thus, business means being busy. However, in a specific sense, business refers to an occupation in which people regularly engage in activities related to purchase, production and/or sale of goods and services with a view to earning profits. If you look around you will observe that people undertake various activities to satisfy their needs. These activities may be broadly classified into two groups — economic and non-economic activities. Economic activities are those by which we can earn our livelihood, whereas, non-economic 2024-25 Chapter 1 .indd   8 13-01-2021   09:40:07 BUSINESS, TRADE AND COMMERCE 9 activities are performed out of love, namely business, profession and sympathy, sentiment, patriotism, employment. Business may be defined etc. For example, a worker working as an economic activity involving the in a factory, a doctor operating in his production and sale of goods and clinic, a manager working in an office and a teacher teaching in a school services undertaken with a motive of are doing so to earn their livelihoods earning profit by satisfying human and are, therefore, engaged in an needs in society. economic activity. On the other hand, a housewife cooking food for her family, Activity or a boy helping an old man cross the road are performing non-economic Barter system is an old method of activities since they are doing so out exchange of goods and/or services for another set of goods and/or services. of love or sympathy. Is barter system an economic activity? Economic activit ies may be Give reasons for your answer. further divided into three categories, Try it yourself: State whether each of the following is an economic activity or not. Give reasons for your answer. 1. Health worker treating her patient. 2. Store owner sympathies with a needy elderly person and gives medicines for his ailment. 3. Football coach giving training in football to his daughter for forthcoming match. 4. Services of a housewife doing household chores at home. 5. Donation made by a business house towards community kitchen run by an NGO for providing food, medicines to underprivileged people and migrant workers of the society during Covid 19 pandemic. 1.2.1 Characteristics of Business  (i) An economic activity: Business Activities is considered to be an economic In order to appreciate how business activity because it is undertaken activity is different from other activities with the objective of earning in society, the nature of business or money or livelihood and not its fundamental character must be out of love, affection, sympathy explained in terms of its distinguishing or any other emotion. It may characteristics, which are as follows: be mentioned here that this 2024-25 Chapter 1 .indd   9 13-01-2021   09:40:07 10 BUSINESS  STUDIES activity can be undertaken either characteristic of business is that on small and individual level, there should be sale or exchange e.g. (purchase and sale by a of goods or services between the shopkeeper) or on large scale seller and the buyer. in a more formal and organised  (iv) Dealings in goods and services level (purchase and sale by a on a regular basis: Business cooperative society or company). involves dealings in goods or (ii) Production or procurement services on a regular basis. One of goods and services: Before single transaction of sale or goods are offered to people for purchase, therefore, does not consumption, these must be constitute business. Thus, for either produced or procured example, if a person sells his/ by business enterprises. Thus, her domestic radio set even at a every business enterprise either profit, it will not be considered a manufactures the goods it deals in business activity. But if he/she or acquires them from producers, sells radio sets regularly either to be further sold to consumers through a shop or from his/her or users. Goods may consist residence, it will be regarded as of consumable items of daily a business activity. use, such as sugar, ghee, pen,  (v)	 Profit	earning: One of the main notebook, etc., or capital goods, purpose of business is to earn like machinery, furniture, etc. income by way of profit. No Services may include facilities business can survive for long offered to consumers, business without profit. That is why, firms and organisations in the businessmen make all possible form of transportation, banking, efforts to maximise profits, by electricity, etc. increasing the volume of sales or (iii) Sale or exchange of goods and reducing costs. services: Directly or indirectly,  (vi) Uncertainty of return: Uncertainty business involves transfer or of return refers to the lack of exchange of goods and services knowledge relating to the amount for value. If goods are produced of money that the business is not for the purpose of sale but going to earn in a given period. for personal consumption, it Every business invests money cannot be called a business (capital) to run its activities with activity. Cooking food at home the objective of earning profit. for the family is not business, But it is not certain as to what but cooking food and selling amount of profit will be earned. it to others in a restaurant is Also, there is always a possibility business. Thus, one essential of losses being incurred, despite 2024-25 Chapter 1 .indd   10 13-01-2021   09:40:07 BUSINESS, TRADE AND COMMERCE 11 the best efforts put into the accidents, natural calamities, etc. business. No business can altogether do (vii) Element of risk: Risk is the away with risks. uncertainty associated with an exposure to loss. It is caused by 1.2.3 Comparison of Business, some unfavourable or undesirable Profession and Employment event. Risks are related with As has been mentioned earlier, factors, like changes in consumer economic activities may be divided into taste and fashion, changes in three major categories viz., Business, method of production, strike or Profession and Employment. The lockout at workplace, increased difference between these three terms competition in market, fire, theft, is given in figure 1.2. Basic Business Profession Employment 1. Mode of  Entrepreneur’s Membership of a Appointment establishment decision and other professional body letter and service legal formalities, if and certificate of agreement necessary practice 2. Nature of work Provision of Rendering of Performing work as goods and personalised, per service contract services to the expert services or rules of service public 3. Qualification No minimum Qualifications, Qualification qualification is expertise and and training as necessary training in specific prescribed by the field as prescribed employer by the professional body is a must 4. Reward or  Profit earned Professional fee Salary or wages return 5. Capital  Capital Limited capital No capital required investment investment needed for required as per establishment size and nature of business 6. Risk Profits are uncertain Fee is generally Fixed and regular and irregular; risk is regular and pay; no or little risk present certain; some risk 2024-25 Chapter 1 .indd   11 13-01-2021   09:40:07 12 BUSINESS  STUDIES 7. Transfer of  Transfer Not possible Not possible interest possible with some formalities 8. Code of  No code of Professional code Norms of behaviour conduct conduct is of conduct is to be laid down by the prescribed followed employer are to be followed 9. Example Shop, factory Legal, medical Jobs in banks, profession, insurance chartered companies, accountancy government departments 1.3 ClassifiCaTion of Business breeding and raising of animals. aCTiviTies The term industry is also used to mean groups of firms producing Various business activities may be similar or related goods. For example, classified into two broad categories cotton textile industry refers to all —industry and commerce. Industry manufacturing units producing textile is concerned with the production or goods from cotton. Similarly, electronic processing of goods and materials. industry would include all firms Commerce includes all those activities, producing electronic goods, and so on. which are necessary for facilitating the Further, in common parlance, certain exchange of goods and services. On the services, like banking and insurance, basis of these two categories, we may are also referred to as industry, say classify business firms into industrial banking industry, insurance industry, and commercial enterprises. Let us etc. Industries may be divided into examine in detail the activities relating three broad categories namely primary, to business. secondary and tertiary. (i) Primary industries: These 1.3.1 Industry include all those activities which Industry refers to economic activities, are concerned with the extraction which are connected with conversion of and production of natural resources into useful goods. Generally, resources and reproduction and the term industry is used for activities development of living organisms, in which mechanical appliances and plants, etc. These are divided as technical skills are involved. These follows. include activities relating to producing  (a) Extractive industries: or processing of goods, as well as, These industries extract 2024-25 Chapter 1 .indd   12 13-01-2021   09:40:07 BUSINESS, TRADE AND COMMERCE 13 or draw products from  (a) Manufacturing industries: natural sources. Extractive These industries are engaged industries supply some basic in producing goods through raw materials that are mostly processing of raw materials products of geographical and, thus, creating form or natural environment. utilities. They bring out Products of these industries diverse finished products, are usually transformed into that we consume, or use many other useful goods by through the conversion manufacturing industries. of raw materials or partly I m p o r t a n t  e x t r a c t i v e finished materials in their industries include farming, manufacturing operations. mining, lumbering, hunting Manufacturing industries and fishing operations. may be further divided into (b) Genetic industries: These four categories on the basis industries are engaged of method of operation for in breeding plants and production. animals for their use in • Analytical industry which further reproduction. Seeds analyses and separates and nursery companies are different elements from typical examples of genetic the same materials, as industries. In additional, in the case of oil refinery. activities of cattle breeding • Synthetical industry farms, poultry farms, and which combines various fish hatchery come under ingredients into a new genetic industries. product, as in the case of (ii) Secondary industries: These are cement. concerned with using materials, • Process ing industry which have  a l ready  been which involves successive extracted at the primary sector. stages for manufacturing These industries process such finished products, as in materials to produce goods for the case of sugar and final consumption or for further paper. processing by other industrial • Assembling industry units. For example, mining of iron which assembles different ore is a primary industry, but component parts to make manufacturing of steel by way of a new product, as in the further processing of raw irons is case of television, car, a secondary industry. Secondary computer, etc. industries may be further divided  (b) Construction industries: as follows: These industries are involved 2024-25 Chapter 1 .indd   13 13-01-2021   09:40:07 14 BUSINESS  STUDIES in the construct ion of 1.3.2 Commerce buildings, dams, bridges, roads as well as tunnels Commerce includes two types of and canals. Engineering activities, viz., (i) trade and (ii) and architectural skills auxiliaries to trade. Buying and are an important part in selling of goods is termed as trade. construction industries. But there are a lot of activities that are required to facilitate the purchase (iii) Tertiary industries:  These are and sale of goods. These are called concerned with providing support services or auxiliaries to trade and services to primary and secondary include transport, banking, insurance, industries as well as activities communication, advertisement, relating to trade. These industries packag ing  and  warehous ing . provide service facilities. As Commerce, therefore, includes both, business activities, these may buying and selling of goods, i.e., be considered part of commerce trade, as well as, auxiliaries, such as because as auxiliaries to trade transport, banking, etc. these activities assist trade. Commerce provides the necessary Included in this category are l i nk  be tween  p roduce rs  and transport, banking, insurance, consumers. It embraces all those warehousing, communication, activities, which are necessary for packaging and advertising. maintaining a free flow of goods and Chart Showing Business Activities 2024-25 Chapter 1 .indd   14 13-01-2021   09:40:07 BUSINESS, TRADE AND COMMERCE 15 services. Thus, all activities involving a large scale and it is difficult for the removal of hindrances in the producers to themselves reach out process of exchange are included in to individual buyers for selling their commerce. The hindrances may be in products. Businessmen are engaged respect of persons, place, time, risk, in trading activities to make the goods finance, etc. The hindrance of persons available to consumers in different is removed by trade, thereby, making markets. In the absence of trade, it goods available to consumers from the would not be possible to undertake possession or ownership producers. production activities on a large scale. Transport removes the hindrances of Activities which are meant for place by moving goods from the place assisting trade are known as auxiliaries of production to the markets for sale. to trade. These activities are generally Storage and warehousing activities referred to as services because these remove the hindrance of time by are in the nature of facilitating the facilitating holding of stocks of goods activities relating to industry and to be sold as and when required. trade. Transport, banking, insurance, Goods held in stock, as well as, goods warehousing, and advertising are in course of transport are subject regarded as auxiliaries to trade, i.e., to a risk of loss or damage due to activities playing a supportive role. theft, fire, accidents, etc. Protection In fact, these activities support not against these risks is provided by only trade, but also industry and, insurance of goods. Capital required hence, the entire business activity. to undertake the above activities is Auxiliaries are an integral part of provided by banking and financing commerce in particular and business institutions. Advertising makes it activity in general. These activities possible for producers and traders to help in removing various hindrances inform consumers about the goods which arise in connection with the and services available in the market. production and distribution of goods. Hence, commerce is said to consist of Transport facilitates movement of activities of removing the hindrances of goods from one place to another. persons, place, time, risk, finance and Banking provides financial assistance information in the process of exchange to the manufacturer and trader. of goods and services. Insurance covers various kinds of business risks. Warehousing creates 1.3.3 Trade and Auxiliaries to Trade time utility by way of storage facilities. Trade is an essential part of commerce. Advertising provides information to It refers to sale, transfer or exchange the consumers. In other words, these of goods either physical or virtual. It activities facilitate movement, storage, helps in making the goods produced financing, risk coverage and sales available to the consumers or users. promotion of goods. Auxiliaries to These days’ goods are produced on trade are briefly discussed below: 2024-25 Chapter 1 .indd   15 13-01-2021   09:40:07 16 BUSINESS  STUDIES (i) Transport and Communication: undertake collection of cheques, Production of goods generally takes remittance of funds to different place in particular locations. For places, and discounting of bills instance, tea is mainly produced on behalf of traders. In foreign in Assam; cotton in Gujarat and trade, commercial banks help Maharashtra; jute in West Bengal exporters in collecting money and Odisha; sugar in U.P., Bihar from importers. Commercial and Maharashtra and so on. banks also help promoters of But these goods are required for companies to raise capital from consumption in different parts of the public. the country. The obstacle of place is removed by transport through  (iii) Insurance: Business involves road, rail or coastal shipping. various types of risks. Factory Transport facilitates movement building, machinery, furniture, of raw material, to the place etc., must be protected against of production and the finished fire, theft and other risks. products from factories to the Material and goods help in stock place of consumption. Along or in transit are subject to the with transport facility, there is risk of loss or damage. Employees also a need for communication are also required to be protected facilities so that producers, against the risks of accident and traders and consumers may occupational hazards. Insurance exchange information with one provides protection in all such another. Thus, postal services cases. On payment of a nominal and telephone facilities may also premium, the amount of loss or be regarded as auxiliaries to damage and compensation for business activities. injury, if any, can be recovered from the insurance company. (ii) Banking and Finance: Business activities cannot be undertaken  (iv) Warehousing: Usually, goods are unless funds are available for not sold or consumed immediately acquiring assets, purchasing after production. They are held raw materials and meeting other in stock to make them available expenses. Necessary funds can as and when required. Special be obtained by businessmen arrangement must be made for from a bank. Thus, banking the storage of goods to prevent helps business activities to loss or damage. Warehousing overcome the problem of finance. helps business firms to overcome Commercial banks, generally the problem of storage and lend money by providing overdraft facilitates the availability of goods and cash credit facilities, loans when needed. Prices are, thereby, and advances. Banks also maintained at a reasonable level 2024-25 Chapter 1 .indd   16 13-01-2021   09:40:07 BUSINESS, TRADE AND COMMERCE 17 through continuous supply of available goods and services goods. and inducing customers to buy (v) Adve r t i s ing  and  Pub l i c particular items. Advertisements Relations: There is an old saying are always a paid activity where “Advertising is what you pay business occupies space in print for and PR is what you pray or non-print media to promote its for”. Both advertisement and product or a service. PR activities, PR activities are the tools to on the other hand, are normally commerce, influence and promote unpaid where business enters your product, services or an idea into a strategic communication to you potential customers and to build a mutually beneficial motivate you target customers to relationship. recognise your accomplishments. Advert is ing and publ ic 1.4 oBjeCTives of Business relation activities are one of An objective is the starting point of the most important methods of business. Every business is directed to promoting the sale of products the achievement of certain objectives. and services in a market place. Objectives refer to all that the business It  is practically impossible for people want to get in return for what producers and traders to contact they do. It is generally believed that each and every customer. Thus, business activity is carried out only for for promoting sales, information profit. Business persons themselves in made available through proclaim that their primary objective advertisements and publicity is produce or distribute goods or tools about their features, price, services for profit. Every business etc., to the potential customers. is said to be an attempt on the part Also, there is a need to persuade of business people to get more than potential customer’s and buyers what has been spent or invested, or about the utility featuress, quality, in other words, to earn profit which price, competitive information is the excess of revenue over cost. about the goods and services, etc. However, it is being increasingly The publicity of such attributes realised nowadays that business of products and services are enterprises are part of the society done using various techniques of and need to fulfil several objectives, maintaining public relation tools. including social responsibility, to The popular PR tool is the use of survive and prosper in the long run. press release in print and social Profit is found to be a leading objective media platforms. Advertising and but not the only one. Public Relations activities helps Although earning profit cannot in providing information about be the only objective of business, its 2024-25 Chapter 1 .indd   17 13-01-2021   09:40:08 18 BUSINESS  STUDIES importance cannot be ignored. Every 1.5 oBjeCTives of Business business is an attempt to reap more than what has been invested, and Objectives are needed in every area that profit is the excess of revenue over influences the survival and prosperity cost. Profit may be regarded as an of business. Since a business has essential objective of business for to balance a number of needs and various reasons: (i) it is a source of goals, it requires multiple objectives. income for business persons, (ii) it It cannot follow only one objective can be a source of finance for meeting and expect to achieve excellence. expansion requirements of business, Objectives have to be specific in (iii) it indicates the efficient working every area and sphere of business. of business, (iv) it can be taken as Objectives also enable the business the society’s approval of the utility to analyse their own performance and of business, and (v) it builds the take steps as necessary to improve reputation of a business enterprise. their performance in future. Some of However, too much emphasis these areas are described as follows. on profit to the exclusion of other  (i) Market standing: Marinating objectives can be dangerous for goodwill and reputation of ones’ good business. Obsessed with profit, business is paramount to succeed business managers may neglect and prosper. It helps in forming a all other responsibilities towards distinct identity in the market and customers, employees, investors and is referred to as market standing society at large. They may even be in relation to its competitors. A inclined to exploit various sections of business enterprise must aim society to earn immediate profit. This at standing on stronger footing may result in the non-cooperation in terms of offering competitive or even opposition from the affected products at reasonable prices to people against the malpractices of its customers and serving them business enterprises. The enterprises to their satisfaction. might lose business and may be  (ii) Innovation: Innovation is central unable to earn profit. This is essential to the growth of any business for its own survival and prosperity. enterprise. It helps business to scale up and give competitive Activity edge to the enterprise in the market. Innovation is defined as When a business person conceptualises an introduction of new ideas or and starts a business; runs it, scales it up then why ‘maximising business methods in the way something is profit is not a sole objective of business? done or made. However, it does Discuss in your class. Give reasons. not imply that a new product is to be manufactured. Any 2024-25 Chapter 1 .indd   18 13-01-2021   09:40:08 BUSINESS, TRADE AND COMMERCE 19 modification in the existing important for its survival and product to enhance its operation growth. also denotes innovativeness. There are two kinds of innovation  (vi) Social responsibility: Social in every business, i .e. ,  ( i ) responsibility refers to the innovation in product or services; obligation of business firms to and (ii) innovation in various contribute resources for solving skills and activities needed to social problems and work in a supply products and services. No socially desirable manner. business enterprise can flourish in a competitive world without 1.6 Business risk innovation. Therefore, innovation The term ‘business risk’ refers to becomes an important objective. the possibility of inadequate profits ( iii) Productivity: Productivity is or even losses due to uncertainties ascertained by comparing the or unexpected events. For example, value of output with the value of demand for a particular product may inputs. It is used as a measure decline due to change in tastes and of efficiency. In order to ensure preferences of consumers or due to continuous survival and progress, increased competition from other every enterprise must aim at producers. Lower demand results greater productivity through the in long sales and profits. In another best use of available resources. situation, the shortage of raw materials (iv) P h y s i c a l  a n d  f i n a n c i a l in the market may shoot up its price. resources :  Any bus iness The firm using these raw materials will requires physical resources, have to pay more for buying them. As a like plants, machines, offices, result, cost of production may increase etc., and financial resources, which, in turn, may reduce profits. i.e., funds to be able to produce Business enterprises constantly and supply goods and services face two types of risk: speculative to its customers. The business and pure. Speculative risks involve enterprise must aim at acquiring both the possibility of gain, as well these resources according to as, the possibility of loss. Speculative their requirements and use them risks arise due to changes in market efficiently. conditions, including fluctuations (v) Earning profits: One of the in demand and supply, changes in objectives of business is to earn prices or changes in fashion and profits on the capital employed. tastes of customers. Favourable Profitability refers to profit in market conditions are likely to result relation to capital investment. in gains, whereas, unfavourable Every business must earn a ones may result in losses. Pure risks reasonable profit which is so involve only the possibility of loss or 2024-25 Chapter 1 .indd   19 13-01-2021   09:40:08 20 BUSINESS  STUDIES no loss. The chance of fire, theft or For example, a business dealing strike are examples of pure risks. in fashionable items has a high Their occurrence may result in loss, degree of risk. Similarly, a largewhereas, non-occurrence may explain scale business generally has a absence of loss, instead of gain. higher risk than what a small scale has. 1.6.1 Nature of Business Risks  (iv) Profit is the reward for risk Nature of business risks can be taking: ‘No risk, no gain’ is an understood in terms of their peculiar age-old principle which applies characteristics: to all types of business. Greater (i) Risk is an essential part of the risk involved in a business, every business: Every business higher is the chance of profit. An has some risk. No business can entrepreneur undertakes risks under the expectation of higher avoid risk, although the amount profit. Profit is thus the reward of risk may vary from business to for risk taking. business. Risk can be minimised, but cannot be eliminated. 1.6.2 Cause of Business Risks (ii) Business risks arise due to Business risks arise due to a variety of uncertainties: Uncertainty refers causes, which are classified as follows: to the lack of knowledge about what is going to happen in future.  (i) Natural causes: Human beings Natural calamities, change in have little control over natural demand and prices, changes in calamities, like flood, earthquake, government policies and prices, lightning, heavy rains, famine, improvement in technology, etc., property and income in etc., are some of the examples of business. uncertainty which create risks for  (ii) Human causes: Human causes business because the outcomes include such unexpected events, of these future events are not like dishonesty, carelessness or known. negligence of employees, stoppage (iii) Degree of risk depends mainly of work due to power failure, upon the nature and size of strikes, riots, management business: Nature of business inefficiency, etc. (i.e., type of goods and services ( iii) Economic causes :  These produced and sold) and size include uncertainties relating to of business (i.e., volume of demand for goods, competition, production and sale) are the price, collection of dues from main factors which determine customers, change of technology the amount of risk in a business. or method of production, etc. 2024-25 Chapter 1 .indd   20 13-01-2021   09:40:08 BUSINESS, TRADE AND COMMERCE 21 Financial problems, like rise in Taking to entrepreneurship by starting interest rate for borrowing, levy one’s own business is a matter of