Part-II Corporate Organisation, Finance and Trade 2024-25 Chapter 7.indd   151 9/2/2022   2:13:12 PM Chapter 7 Formation oF a Company LEARNING OBJECTIVES After studying this chapter, you should be able to: •	 specify the important stages in the formation of a company; •	 describe the steps involved in each stage of company formation; •	 specify the documents to be submitted to the registrar of companies; and •	 state the need of certificate of incorporation and certificate to commence business. 2024-25 Chapter 7.indd   152 9/2/2022   2:13:12 PM FORMATION OF A COMPANY 153 Avtar, a brilliant automobile engineer, has recently developed a new carburettor in his factory which he is running as a sole proprietor. The new carburettor can cut down petrol consumption of a car engine by 40 percent. He is now thinking of producing it on a large scale for which he requires a large amount of money. He is to evaluate different forms of organisations for doing the business of manufacturing and marketing his carburettor. He decides against converting his sole proprietorship to partnership as the requirement of funds for the project is large and the product being new, there is a lot of risk involved. He is advised to form a company. He wants to know about the formalities required for the formation of a company. 7.1 introduCtion formalities and procedures. To fully Modern day business requires understand the process one can divide large amount of money. Also, due the formalities into three distinct to increasing competition and fast stages, which are: (i) Promotion; (ii) changing technological environment, Incorporation and (iii) Subscription the element of risk is increasing. of capital. As a result, the company form of It may, however, be noted that organisation is being preferred by more these stages are appropriate from the point of view of formation of any and	more	business	firms,	particularly	 kind of company. Private company as for setting up medium and large sized against the public limited company organisations. is prohibited to raise funds from The steps which are required from public, it does not need to issue a the time a business idea originates to prospectus and complete the formality the time, a company is legally ready to of minimum subscription. commence business are referred to as In the next section, we shall stages in the formation of a company. discuss the stages in the formation of Those who are taking these steps and a company in detail. the associated risks are promoting a company and are called its promoters. 7.2.1 Promotion of a Company The present chapter describes in some details the stages in the Promotion is the first stage in the formation of a company and also the formation of a company. It involves steps required to be taken in each conceiving a business idea and taking stage so that a fair idea about these an initiative to form a company so aspects can be made.  that practical shape can be given to exploiting the available business 7.2 Formation oF a Company opportunity. Thus, it begins with somebody having discovered a Formation of a company is a complex potential business idea. Any person or activity involving completion of legal a group of persons or even a company 2024-25 Chapter 7.indd   153 9/2/2022   2:13:12 PM 154 BUSINESS  STUDIES may have discovered an opportunity. company to commence business. If such a person or a group of persons Thus, the promoters perform various or a company proceeds to form a functions to bring a company into company, then, they are said to be the existence. promoters of the company. A promoter is said to be the one who Functions of a Promoter undertakes to form a company with reference to a given project and to set The important functions of promoters it going and who takes the necessary may be listed as below: steps to accomplish that purpose. ( i )  Identification of business Thus, apart from conceiving a business opportunity:	 The	first	 and	 foremost opportunity the promoters analyse its activity of a promoter is to identify a prospects and bring together the men, business opportunity. The opportunity materials, machinery, managerial may be in respect of producing a new abilities	and	financial	 resources	and	 product or service or making some set the organisation going. product available through a different As per section 69, a promoter channel or any other opportunity means a person having an investment potential. Such (a) Who has been named as such in opportunity is then analysed to see a prospectus or is identified by its technical and economic feasibility. the company in the annual return (ii) Feasibility studies: It may not referred to in section 92; or be	feasible	or	profitable	to	convert	all (b) Who has control over the affairs of identified	business	opportunities	into the company, directly or indirectly real projects. The promoters, therefore, whether as a shareholder, director undertake detailed feasibility studies to or otherwise; or investigate all aspects of the business (c) In accordance with whose advice, they intend to start. Depending upon directions or instructions the the nature of the project, the following Board of Directors of the company feasibility studies may be undertaken, is accustomed to act. However, it is with the help of the specialists like provided that nothing in this sub- engineers, chartered accountants clause shall apply to a person who etc., to examine whether the perceived is acting merely in a professional business	opportunity	can	be	profitably capacity. exploited. After thoroughly examining the ( a) Technical feasibility: Sometimes feasibility of the idea, the promoters an idea may be good but technically assemble resources, prepare necessary not possible to execute. It may documents, give a name and perform be so because the required raw various other activities to get a material or technology is not easily company registered and obtain the available. For example, in our necessary certificate enabling the earlier story suppose Avtar needs 2024-25 Chapter 7.indd   154 9/2/2022   2:13:12 PM FORMATION OF A COMPANY 155 a particular metal to produce arranged	by	floating	a	company	by the carburettor. If that metal the promoters. The idea may be is not produced in the country abandoned because of the lack of and because of poor political financial	feasibility	of	the	project. relations, it can not be imported ( c) Economic feasibility: Sometimes from the country which produces it so happens that a project is it, the project would be technically technically	 viable	 and	 financially unfeasible until arrangements are feasible but the chance of it being made to make the metal available profitable is very little. In such from alternative sources. cases as well, the idea may have to (b) Financial feasibility: Every be abondoned. Promoters usually business activity requires funds. take the help of experts to conduct The promoters have to estimate these studies. It may be noted the fund requirements for the that these experts do not become identified	business	opportunity.	If	 promoters just because they are the required outlay for the project assisting the promoters in these is so large that it cannot easily studies. be arranged within the available Only when these investigations means, the project has to be given throw up posit ive results, the up. For example, one may think promoters may decide to actually that developing townships is very launch a company. lucrative. It may turn out that (iii) Name approval: Having decided the required funds are in several incorporate to a company, the crores of rupees, which cannot be promoters have to select a name for Name Clause A name is considered undesirable in the following cases: (a) If it is identical with or too closely resembles the name of an existing company (b) If it is misleading. It is so considered if the name suggests that the company is in a particular business or it is an association of a particular type when it is not true (c) If it is violative of the provisions of ‘The Emblem and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act 1950, as given in the schedule to this Act. This schedule specifies,	inter	alia,	the	name,	emblem	or	official	seal	of	the	UNO	and	its bodies like WHO, UNESCO etc. Government of India, State Governments, President of India or Governer of any State, the Indian National Flag. The Act also prohibits use of any name which may suggest patronage of Government of India, or any state government or any local authority 2024-25 Chapter 7.indd   155 9/2/2022   2:13:12 PM 156 BUSINESS  STUDIES it and submit, an application to the (vi)  Preparation of necessary registrar of companies of the state documents: The promoter takes in	which	 the	 registered	 office	 of	 the	 up steps to prepare certain legal company is to be situated, for its documents, which have to be submitted approval. The proposed name may under the law, to the Registrar of the be approved if it is not considered Companies for getting the company undesirable. It may happen that registered. These documents are another company exists with the Memorandum of Association, Articles of same name or a very similar name Association and Consent of Directors. or the preferred name is misleading, say, to suggest that the company is in Documents Required to be a particular business when it is not Submitted true. In such cases the proposed name  A. Memorandum of Association: is not accepted but some alternate Memorandum of Association is name may be approved. Therefore, the most important document three names, in order of their priority as	 it	defines	 the	objectives	of	 the are given in the application to the company. No company can legally Registrar of Companies. (Proforma undertake activities that are not INC1 is given at the end of the Book). contained in its Memorandum of (iv) Fixing up Signatories to the Association. As per section 2(56) Memorandum of Association: of The Companies Act, 2013 Promoters have to decide about the “memorandum”  means  the members who will be signing the memorandum of association of Memorandum of Association of the a company as originally framed proposed company. Usually the people or as altered from time to time signing memorandum are also the in pursuance of any previous first	Directors	of	the	Company.	Their	 company law or of this Act. The written consent to act as Directors and Memorandum of Association to	take	up	the	qualification	shares	in	 contains different clauses, which the company is necessary. are given as follows: (v) Appointment of professionals: (i) The name clause: This clause Certain professionals such as contains the name of the company mercantile bankers, auditors etc., are with which the company will be known, appointed by the promoters to assist which has already been approved by them in the preparation of necessary the Registrar of Companies. documents which are required to be (ii)  Registered  office  clause: This with the Registrar of Companies. The clause contains the name of the state, names and addresses of shareholders in	which	 the	 registered	 office	 of	 the and the number of shares allotted to company is proposed to be situated. each is submitted to the Registrar in a The exact address of the registered statement called return of allotment. office is not required at this stage 2024-25 Chapter 7.indd   156 9/2/2022   2:13:12 PM FORMATION OF A COMPANY 157 but	the	same	must	be	notified	to	the	 although it may not have been stated Registrar within thirty days of the explicitly. incorporation of the company. (iv) Liability clause: This clause (iii) Objects clause: This is probably limits the liability of the members the most important clause of the to the amount unpaid on the shares memorandum.	It	defines	the	purpose	 owned by them. for which the company is formed. For example, if a shareholder has A company is not legally entitled to purchased 1000 shares of `10 each undertake an activity, which is beyond and has already paid ` 6 per share, the objects stated in this clause. The his/her liability is limited to ` 4 per main objects for which the company share. Thus, even in the worst case, is formed are listed in this sub-clause. he/she may be called upon to pay It must be observed that an act which ` 4, 000 only. is either essential or incidental for (v) Capital clause: This clause the attainment of the main objects of specifies	the	maximum	capital	which the company is deemed to be valid, the company will be authorised to Respective forms for Memorandum of Association 1. Table A MOA of a company limited by shares 2. Table B MOA of a company limited by guarantee and not having share capital 3. Table C MOA of a company limited by guarantee and not having share capital 4. Table D MOA of an unlimited company and not having share capital 5. Table E MOA of an unlimited company and having share capital Respective forms for Articles of a Company 6. Table F AOA of a company limited by shares 7. Table G AOA of a company limited by guarantee and having share capital 8. Table H AOA of a company limited by guarantee and not having share capital 9. Table I AOA of an unlimited company and having share capital 10. Table J AOA of an unlimited company and not having share capital 2024-25 Chapter 7.indd   157 9/2/2022   2:13:12 PM 158 BUSINESS  STUDIES raise through the issue of shares. or as altered from time to time The authorised share capital of the or applied in pursuance of any proposed company along with its previous company law or of this Act. division into the number of shares The articles of a company shall be having	a	fixed	face	value	is	specified	in	 in	respective	forms	as	specified	in this clause. For example, the authorised Table F, G, H, I and J in schedule share capital of the company may be I as may be applicable to such ` 25 lakhs with divided into 2.5 lakh company. However, the companies shares of ̀  10 each. The said company are free to make their own articles cannot issue share capital in excess of of association which may be the amount mentioned in this clause. contrary to the clauses of Table The signatories to the Memorandum F,G,H,I,J and in that case articles of Association state their intention to of association as adopted by the be associated with the company and company shall apply. give their undertaking to subscribe  C. Consent of Proposed Directors: to the shares mentioned against Apart from the Memorandum and their names. The memorandum of a Articles of Association, a written company shall be in respective forms consent of each person named as a specified	in	Tables	A,	B,	C,	D	and	E	 director	is	required	confirming	that in Schedule I as may be applicable to they agree to act in that capacity such company. and undertake to buy and pay for The Memorandum of Association qualification	shares,	as	mentioned must be signed by at least seven in the Articles of Association. persons in case of a public company  D. Agreement: The agreement, if and by two persons in case of a private any, which the company proposes company. to enter with any individual for A copy of a Memorandum of appointment as its Managing Association is given at the end of the Director or a whole time Director chapter. or Manager is another document B. Articles of Association: Articles of which is required to be submitted Association are the rules regarding to the registrar for getting the internal management of a company. company registered under the Act. These rules are subsidiary to the  E. Statutory  Dec la rat ion :  A Memorandum of Association and declaration stating that all the hence, should not contradict or legal requirements pertaining to exceed anything stated in the registration have been complied Memorandum of Association. with is to be submitted to the According to section 2(5) of The Registrar with the above mentioned Companies Act, 2013, ‘articles’ documents for getting the company means the article of association registered under the law. This of a company as originally framed statement can be signed by 2024-25 Chapter 7.indd   158 9/2/2022   2:13:12 PM FORMATION OF A COMPANY 159 Qualification Shares To ensure that the directors have some stake in the proposed company, the Articles usually have a provision requiring them to buy a certain number of shares.	They	have	to	pay	for	these	shares	before	the	company	obtains	Certificate of	Commencement	of	Business.	These	are	called	Qualification	Shares. The Articles generally contains the following matters: 1. Exclusion wholly or in part of Table F. 2. Adoption of preliminary contracts. 3. Number and value of shares. 4. Issue of preference shares. 5. Allotment of shares. 6. Calls on shares. 7. Lien on shares. 8. Transfer and transmission of shares. 9. Nomination. 10. Forfeiture of shares. 11. Alteration of capital. 12. Buy back. 13.	 Share	certificates. 14. Dematerialization. 15. Conversion of shares into stock. Incorporation of Companies and Matters Incidental Thereto 16. Voting rights and proxies. 17. Meetings and rules regarding committees. 18. Directors, their appointment and delegations of powers. 19. Nominee directors. 20. Issue of Debentures and stocks. 21. Audit committee. 22. Managing director, Whole-time director, Manager, Secretary. 23. Additional directors. 24. Seal. 25. Remuneration of directors. 26. General meetings. 27. Directors meetings. 28. Borrowing powers. 29. Dividends and reserves. 30. Accounts and audit. 31. Winding up. 32. Indemnity. 33. Capitalisation of reserves. 2024-25 Chapter 7.indd   159 9/2/2022   2:13:12 PM 160 BUSINESS  STUDIES an advocate or by a Chartered for the loss suffered due to the nonAccountant or a Cost Accountant disclosure of material information. or a Company Secretary in practice Promoters are not legally entitled who is engaged in the formation to claim the expenses incurred in the of a company and by a person promotion of the company. However, named in the articles as a director the company may choose to reimburse or manager or secretary of the them for the pre-incorporation company. expenses. The company may also F. Receipt of Payment of fee: remunerate the promoters for their Along with the above-mentioned efforts by paying a lump sum amount documents, necessary fees has to or a commission on the purchase price be paid for the registration of the of property purchased through them or company. The amount of such fees on the shares sold. The company may shall depend on the authorised also allot them shares or debentures share capital of the company. or give them an option to purchase the securities at a future date. Position of Promoters Promoters undertake various activities 7.2.2 Incorporation to get a company registered and get After completing the aforesaid it to the position of commencement formalities, promoters make an of business. But they are neither application for the incorporation of the agents nor the trustees of the the company. The application is to be company. They can’t be the agents as filed	with	the	Registrar	of	Companies the company is yet to be incorporated. of the state within which they plan Therefore, they are personally liable to	 establish	 the	 registered	 office	 of for all the contracts which are entered the company. The application for by them, for the company before its registration must be accompanied incorporation, in case the same are with certain documents about which not	ratified	by	the	company	later	on.	 we have already discussed in the Also promoters are not the trustees of previous	sections.	These	may	be	briefly the company. mentioned again: Promoters of a company enjoy a  1. The Memorandum of Association fiduciary	position	with	the	company,	 duly stamped, s igned and which they must not misuse. They witnessed. In case of a public can	make	a	profit	only	if	it	is	disclosed	 company, at least seven members but	must	not	make	any	secret	profits.	 must sign it. For a private In the event of a non-disclosure, the company however the signatures company can rescind the contract and of	 two	members	 are	 sufficient. recover the purchase price paid to the The signatories must also give promoters. It can also claim damages information about their address, 2024-25 Chapter 7.indd   160 9/2/2022   2:13:13 PM FORMATION OF A COMPANY 161 occupation and the number of documents. However, if the same shares subscribed by them. is not submitted at the time of 2. The Articles of Association duly incorporation, it can be submitted stamped and witnessed as in case within 30 days of the receipt of the of the Memorandum. However, as certificate	of	incorporation. stated earlier, a public company  8. Documentary evidence of payment may adopt Table A, which is a of registration fees. model set of Articles, given in the The Registrar upon submission of Companies Act. In that case a the application along with the required statement in lieu of the prospectus documents	has	to	be	satisfied	that	the is submitted, instead of Articles documents are in order and that all the of Association. statutory requirements regarding the 3. Written consent of the proposed registration have been complied with. directors to act as directors and However, it is not his duty to carry an undertaking to purchase out a thorough investigation about the qualification	shares. authenticity of the facts mentioned in 4. The agreement, if any, with the the documents. proposed Managing Director, When	 the	 Registrar	 is	 satisfied, Manager or whole-time director. about the completion of formalities 5. A copy of the Registrar’s letter for registration, a Certificate of approving the name of the Incorporation is issued to the company, company. which signify the birth of the company. 6.	 A	statutory	declaration	affirming	 The	 certificate	 of	 incorporation	may that all legal requirements for therefore	be	called	the	birth	certificate registration have been complied of the company. with. This must be  duly signed. With effect from November 1, 2000, 7. A notice about the exact address the Registrar of Companies allots a of	 the	registered	office	may	also	 CIN (Corporate Identity Number) to be submitted along with these the Company. Preliminary Contracts During the promotion of the company, promoters enter into certain contracts with third parties on behalf of the company. These are called preliminary contracts or pre-incorporation contracts. These are not legally binding on the company. A company after coming into existence may, if it so chooses, decide to enter into fresh contracts with the same terms and conditions to honour the contracts made by the promoters. Note that it cannot ratify a preliminary contract. A company thus cannot be forced to honour a preliminary contract. Promoters, however, remain personally liable to third parties for these contracts. 2024-25 Chapter 7.indd   161 9/2/2022   2:13:13 PM 162 BUSINESS  STUDIES Effect of the Certificate of  January. But the date mentioned Incorporation on	the	Certificate	was	6th	January. A company is legally born on the It was decided that the company date printed on the Certificate of was in existence and the contracts Incorporation. It becomes a legal signed on 6th January were entity with perpetual succession on considered valid. such date. It becomes entitled to enter ( b) A person forged the signatures into valid	contracts.	The	Certificate	of	 of others on the Memorandum. Incorporation is a conclusive evidence The Incorporation was st i l l of the regularity of the incorporation considered valid. of a company. Imagine, what would Thus,	whatever	be	 the	deficiency happen to an unsuspecting party in the formalities, the Certificate with which the company enters into of Incorporation once issued, is a a contract, if it is later found that the conclusive evidence of the existence of incorporation of the company was the company. Even when a company improper and hence invalid. Therefore, gets registered with illegal objects, the legal situation is that once a the birth of the company cannot be Certificate	of	 Incorporation	has	been	 questioned. The only remedy available issued, the company has become a is	to	wind	it	up.	Because	the	Certificate legal business entity irrespective of any of Incorporation is so crucial, the flaw	in	its	registration.	The	Certificate	 Registrar has to go very carefully of Incorporation is thus conclusive before issuing it. evidence of the legal existence of Both public and private companies the company. Some interesting are	 required	 to	obtain	 the	certificate examples showing the impact of the for commencement of business within conclusiveness	 of	 the	 Certificate	 of	 180 days of its incorporation. Once Incorporation are as under: the certificate for commencement (a) Documents for registration were of business is issued by Registrar filed	on	6th	January.	Certificate	of	 of companies it can undertake their Incorporation was issued on 8th business operations. Director Identification Number (DIN) Every Individual intending to be appointed as director of a company shall make an	application	for	allotment	of	Director	Identification	Number	(DIN)	to	the	Central Government in prescribed form along with fees. The	Central	Government	 shall	 allot	 a	Director	 Identification	Number	 to	 an application within one month from the receipt of the application. No	individual,	who	has	already	been	allotted	a	Director	Identification	Number, shall	apply	for,	obtain	or	possess	another	Director	Identification	Number 2024-25 Chapter 7.indd   162 9/2/2022   2:13:13 PM FORMATION OF A COMPANY 163 7.2.3 Capital Subscription debentures etc.) of the company or A public company can raise the to make deposits in the company. required funds from the public by Investors make up their minds about means of issue of securities (shares investment in a company primarily on and debentures etc.). For doing the the basis of the information contained same, it has to issue a prospectus in this document.  Therefore, there must not be a mis-statement in the which is an invitation to the public to prospectus	and	all	material	significant subscribe to the capital of the company information must be fully disclosed. and undergo various other formalities. (iii) Appointment of Bankers, The following steps are required for Brokers, Underwriters:  Raising funds raising funds from the public: from the public is a stupendous task. (i)  SEBI Approval: SEBI (Securities The application money is to be received and Exchange Board of India) which by the bankers of the company. is the regulatory authority in our The brokers try to sell the shares country has issued guidelines for by distributing the forms and the disclosure of information and encouraging the public to apply for investor protection. A public company the shares. If the company is not inviting funds from the general public reasonably assured of a good public must make adequate disclosure of response to the issue, it may appoint all relevant information and must underwriters to the issue. Underwriters not conceal any material information undertake to buy the shares if these from the potential investors. This is are not subscribed by the public. They necessary for protecting the interest receive a commission for underwriting of the investors. Prior approval from the issue. Appointment of underwriters SEBI is, therefore, required before is not necessary. going ahead with raising funds from (iv) Minimum Subscription: In public. order to prevent companies from (ii)  Filing of Prospectus: A copy   of commencing business with inadequate the prospectus or statement in lieu of resources, it has been provided that prospectus	is	filed	with	the	Registrar	 the company must receive applications of Companies. A prospectus is ‘any for a certain minimum number of document described or  issued as a shares before going ahead with the prospectus  including any  notice, allotment of shares. According to circular, advertisement  or   other the Companies Act, this is called the document  inviting deposits  from the ‘minimum subscription’. As per the public or inviting offers from the public SEBI Guidelines the limit of minimum for the subscription or purchase of subscription is 90 per cent of the size any securities of, a body corporate’. In of the issue. Thus, if applications other words, it is an invitation to the received for the shares are for an public to apply for securities (shares, amount less than 90 per cent of the 2024-25 Chapter 7.indd   163 9/2/2022   2:13:13 PM 164 BUSINESS  STUDIES Difference between Memorandum of Association and Articles of Association Basis of Memorandum of Articles of Association Difference Association Objectives Memorandum of Association Articles of Association are rules defines	the	objects	for	which	 of internal management of the the company is formed. company. They indicate how the objectives of the company are to be achieved. Position This is the main document This is a subsidiary document of the company and and is subordinate to both the is subordinate to the  Memorandum of Association and Companies Act. the Companies Act. Relationship Memorandum of Association Articles	 define	 the	 relationship defines	the	relationship	of	the	 of the members and the company. company with outsiders. Validity Acts beyond the Memorandum Acts which are beyond Articles of Association are invalid can	be	ratified	by	the	members, and	cannot	be	 ratified	even	 provided they do not violate the by a unanimous vote of the Memorandum. members. Necessity Every	company	has	to	file	a	 It is not compulsory for a public Memorandum of Association. ltd.	 company	 to	 file	 Articles	 of Association. It may adopt Table F of The Companies Act, 2013 issue size, the allotment cannot be of closure of subscription list, the made and the application money allotment shall become void and all received must be returned to the money received from the applicants applicants. will have to be returned to them within (v) Application to Stock Exchange: eight days. An application is made to at least one (vi) Allotment of Shares: Till the stock exchange for permission to deal time shares are alloted, application in its shares or debentures. If such money received shoud remain in a permission is not granted before the seperate bank account and must not expiry of ten weeks from the date be used by the company. In case the 2024-25 Chapter 7.indd   164 9/2/2022   2:13:13 PM FORMATION OF A COMPANY 165 number of shares allotted is less than A public company may not invite the number applied for, or where no public to subscribe to its securities shares are allotted to the applicant, the (shares, debentures etc.). Instead, it excess application money, if any, is to can raise the funds through friends, be returned to applicants or adjusted relatives or some private arrangements towards allotment money due from as done by a private company. In such them. Allotment letters are issued cases, there is no need to issue a to the successful allottees. ‘Return prospectus. A ‘Statement in Lieu of of allotment’, signed by a director or Prospectus’	is	filed	with	the	Registrar secretary	is	filed	with	the	Registrar	of	 at least three days before making the Companies within 30 days of allotment. allotment. One Person Company With the implementation of The Companies Act, 2013, a single person could constitute a company, under the One Person Company (OPC) concept. The introduction of OPC in the legal system is a move that would encourage corporatisation of micro businesses and entrepreneurship. In India, in the year 2005, the JJ Irani Expert Committee recommended the formation of OPC. It had suggested that such an entity may be provided with a simpler legal regime through exemptions so that the small entrepreneur is not compelled to devote considerable time, energy and resources on complex legal compliance. One Person Company is a company with only one person as a member. That one person	will	be	the	shareholder	of	the	company.	It	avails	all	the	benefits	of	a	private limited company such as separate legal entity, protecting personal assets from business liability and perpetual succession. Characteristics (1) Only a natural person who is an Indian citizen and resident in India(a)   Shall be eligible to incorporate a One Person Company; (b)   Shall be a nominee for the sole member of a One Person Company. Explanation – For the purposes of this rule, the term “resident in India” means a person who has stayed in India for a period of not less than one hundred and eighty two days during the immediately preceding one calendar year. (2) No person shall be eligible to incorporate more than a One Person Company or become nominee in more than one such company. (3) Where a natural person, being member in One Person Company in accordance with this rule becomes a member in another such Company by virtue of his being a nominee in that One Person Company, such person shall meet the eligibility	criteria	specified	in	sub	rule	(2)	within	a	period	of	one	hundred	and eighty days. 2024-25 Chapter 7.indd   165 9/2/2022   2:13:13 PM 166 BUSINESS  STUDIES (4) No minor shall become member or nominee of the One Person Company or can	hold	share	with	beneficial	interest. (5)  Such Company cannot be incorporated or converted into a company under section 8 of the Act. (6) Such Company cannot carry out Non-Banking Financial Investment activities including investment in securities of anybody corporates. (7) No such company can convert voluntarily into any kind of company unless two years have expired from the date of incorporation of One Person Company, except	threshold	limit	(paid	up	share	capital)	is	increased	beyond	fifty	lakh rupees or its average annual turnover during the relevant period exceeds two crore rupees. 2024-25 Chapter 7.indd   166 9/2/2022   2:13:13 PM FORMATION OF A COMPANY 167 “SCHEDULE I” (See sections 4 and 5) Table A MEMORANDUM OF ASSOCIATION OF A COMPANY LIMITED BY SHARES 1st The name of the company is “.......................................... Limited/Private Limited”. 2nd The	registered	office	of	the	company	will	be	situated	in	the	State	of	.................. 3rd (a) The objects to be pursued by the company on its incorporation are:......................................................................................................................... ......................................................................................................................... (b)	Matters	which	are	necessary	for	furtherance	of	the	objects	specified	in	clause 3 (a) are:- ......................................................................................................................... ......................................................................................................................... 4th The liability of the member(s) is limited and this liability is limited to the amount unpaid, if any,  on the shares held by them. 5th  The share capital of the company is ................................................................... rupees, divided into ........................ shares of ........................ rupees each. 6th We, the several persons, whose names and addresses are subscribed, are desirous of being  formed into a company in pursuance of this memorandum of association, and we respectively agree to take the number of shares in the capital of the company set against our respective names:Names, addresses, No. of shares Signature Signature, names descriptions and  taken by each of subscriber addresses, occupations of    descriptions and subscribers   occupations of witnesses A.B. of ................ Merchant .....................  Signed before me: Signature ............... C.D. of ................ Merchant .....................  Signed before me: Signature ............... E.F. of ................ Merchant .....................  Signed before me: Signature ............... G.H. of ............... Merchant .....................  Signed before me: Signature .............. 2024-25 Chapter 7.indd   167 9/2/2022   2:13:13 PM 168 BUSINESS  STUDIES I.J. of ................ Merchant .....................  Signed before me: Signature .............. K.L. of ................ Merchant .....................  Signed before me: Signature .............. M.N. of ............... Merchant .....................  Signed before me: Signature .............. Total shares taken: 7th  I, whose name and address is given below, am desirous of forming a company in pursuance of this memorandum of association and agree to take all the shares in the capital of the company (Applicable in case of one person company):- __________________________________________________________________ Names, addresses, Signature of subscribed Signature, name, address, occupations of  description and occupation Subscribers  of witness __________________________________________________________________ 8th  Shri/Smt ......................................, son/daughter of ......................................, resident of .................................................................... aged ...................... years shall be the nominee in the event of death of the sole member (Applicable in case of one person company) Dated ...................................... The day of ...................................... 2024-25 Chapter 7.indd   168 9/2/2022   2:13:13 PM FORMATION OF A COMPANY 169 Key Terms Promotion Memorandum of Association Articles of Association Prospectus Incorporation Capital subscription Commencement of Business SUMMARY There are two stages in the formation of a private company, promotion and incorporation. A public company has to undergo capital subscription stage to begin operations. 1. Promotion: It begins with a potential business idea. Certain feasibility studies	e.g.,	technical,	financial	and	economic,	are	conducted	to	determine whether	the	idea	can	be	profitably	exploited.	In	case,	the	investigations yield favourable results, promoters may decide to form the company. Persons who conceive the business idea, decide to form a company, take necessary steps for the same, and assume associated risks, are called promoters. Steps in Promotion i. Approval of company’s name is taken from the Registrar of Companies ii.	 Signatories	to	the	Memorandum	of	Association	are	fixed iii. Certain professionals are appropriated to assist the promoters iv. Documents necessary for registration are prepared Necessary Documents a. Memorandum of Association b. Articles of Association c. Consent of proposed directors d. Agreement, if any, with proposed managing or whole time director e. Statutory declaration 2. Incorporation: An application is made by promoters to the Registrar of Companies alongwith necessary documents and registration fee. The Registrar,	 after	 due	 scrutiny,	 issues	 certificate	 of	 incorporation.	 The certificate	of	incorporation	is	a	conclusive	evidence	of	the	legal	existence of the company. 2024-25 Chapter 7.indd   169 9/2/2022   2:13:13 PM 170 BUSINESS  STUDIES 3. Capital Subscription: A public company raising funds from the public needs to take following steps for fundraising: (i) SEBI approval; (ii) File a copy of prospectus with the Registrar of Companies; (iii) Appointment of brokers, bankers and underwriters etc.; (iv) Ensure that minimum subscription is received; (v) Application for listing of company’s securities; (vi) Refund/adjust excess application money received; (vii) Issue allotment letters to successful applicants; and (viii) File return of allotment with the Registrar of Companies (ROC). A public company, raising funds, raising funds from friends/relatives (not public)	has	to	file	a	statement	in	lieu	of	prospectus	with	the	ROC	at	least	three days before allotment of shares and returns of allotment after completing the allotment. As per the SEBI guidelines, minimum subcription has to be 90% of the shares to be issued to be public. Preliminary Contracts: Contracts signed by promoters with third parties before the incorporation of company. Provisional Contracts: Contracts signed after incorporation but before commencement of business. EXERCISES Short Answer Questions 1. Name the stages in the formation of a company. 2. List the documents required for the incorporation of a company. 3. What	is	a	prospectus?	Is	it	necessary	for	every	company	to	file	a	prospectus? 4. Briefly	explain	the	term	‘Return	of	Allotment’. 5. At which stage in the formation of a company does it interact with SEBI. Long Answer Questions 1. What is meant by the term ‘Promotion’. Discuss the legal position of promoters with respect to a company promoted by them. 2. Explain the steps taken by promoters in the promotion of a company. 2024-25 Chapter 7.indd   170 9/2/2022   2:13:13 PM FORMATION OF A COMPANY 171 3. What	is	a	‘Memorandum	of	Association’?	Briefly	explain	its	clauses. 4. Distinguish between ‘Memorandum of Association’ and ‘Articles of Association.’ 5. What	is	the	meaning	of	‘Certificate	of	Incorporation’? 6. Discuss the stages of formation of a company? Project/Assignment Find	out	from	the	office	of	the	Registrar	of	Companies,	the	actual	procedure	for formation of companies. Does it match with what you have studied. What are the obstacles which companies face in getting themselves registered. 2024-25 Chapter 7.indd   171 9/2/2022   2:13:13 PM