Chapter 11

InternatIonal BusIness

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

After studying this chapter, you should be able to:

•	 State the meaning of International Business

•	 Distinguish between Internal and International Business

•	 Discuss the scope of International Business 

•	 Enumerate	the	benefits	of	International	Business

•	 Discuss the documents required for import and export transactions

•	 Identify	the	incentives	and	schemes	available	for	international	firms

•	 Discuss the role of different organisations for the promotion of 
International Business

•	 List the major international institutions and agreements at the global 
level for the promotion of international trade and development.

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   246 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 247

Mr. Sudhir Manchanda is a small manufacturer of automobile components. His 
factory is located in Gurgaon and employs about 55 workers with an investment 
of Rs. 9.2 million in plant and machinery. Due to recession in the domestic 
market, he foresees prospects of his sales going up in the next few years in the 
domestic market. He is exploring the possibility of going international. Some 
of his competitors are already in export business. A casual talk with one of his 
close friends in the tyre business reveals that there is a substantial market for 
automobile components and accessories in South-East Asia and Middle East. 
But his friend also tells him, “Doing business internationally is not the same as 
carrying out business within the home country. International business is more 
complex as one has to operate under market conditions that are different from 
those that one faces in domestic business”. Mr. Manchanda is, moreover, not sure 
as to how he should go about setting up international business. Should he himself 
identify and contact some overseas customers and start exporting directly to them 
or else route his products through export houses which specialise in exporting 
products made by others? 

Mr. Manchanda’s son who has just returned after an MBA in USA suggests that 
they should set up a fully owned factory in Bangkok for supplying to customers 
in South-East Asia and Middle East. Setting up a manufacturing plant there will 
help them save costs of transporting goods from India. This would also help them 
coming	closer	to	the	overseas	customers.	Mr.	Manchanda	is	in	a	fix	as	to	what	to	
do.	In	the	face	of	difficulties	involved	in	overseas	ventures	as	pointed	out	by	his	
friend, he is wondering about the desirability of entering into global business. He 
is also not sure as to what the different ways of entering into international market 
are and which one will best suit his purpose.

11.1 IntroductIon The prime reason behind this 
radical change is the development 

Countries all over the world are of communication, technology, 
undergoing a fundamental shift in infrastructure etc. Emergence of 
the way they produce and market newer modes of communication and 
various products and services. The development of faster and more 
national economies which so far were efficient	means	of	transportation	have	
pursuing the goal of self-reliance are brought nations closer to one another. 
now becoming increasingly dependent Countries that were cut-off from one 
upon others for procuring as well as another due to geographical distances 
supplying various kinds of goods and and socio-economic differences have 
services. Due to increased cross border now started increasingly interacting 
trade and investments, countries are with others. World Trade Organisation 
no more isolated. (WTO) and reforms carried out by the 

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   247 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM



248 BUSINESS  STUDIES

governments of different countries India has been trading with other 
have also been a major contributory countries for a long time. But it has 
factor to the increased interactions of late considerably speeded up its 
and business relations amongst the process of integrating with the world 
nations. economy and increasing its foreign 

We are today living in a world trade and investments (see Box A: 
where the obstacles to cross-border India Embarks on the Path to 
movement of goods and persons have Globalisation). 
substantially come down. The national 
economies are increasingly becoming 11.1.1 Meaning of International 
borderless and getting integrated into Business
the world economy.  Little wonder 
that the world has today come to be Business transaction taking place 
known as a ‘global village’. Business in within the geographical boundaries 
the present day is no longer restricted of a nation is known as domestic or 
to the boundaries of the domestic national business. It is also referred 
country. More and more firms are to as internal business or home trade. 
making forays into international Manufacturing and trade beyond the 
business which presents them with boundaries of one’s own country is 
numerous opportunities for growth known as international business. 
and	increased	profits.	 International or external business can, 

Box A
India Embarks on the Path to Globalisation

International business has entered into a new era of reforms. India too did not 
remain cut-off from these developments. India was under a severe debt trap and was 
facing crippling balance of payment crisis. In 1991, it approached the International 
Monetary	Fund	(IMF)	for	raising	funds	to	tide	over	its	balance	of	payment	deficits.	
IMF agreed to lend money to India subject to the condition that India would undergo 
structural changes to be able to ensure repayment of borrowed funds. 

India had no alternative but to agree to the proposal. It was the very conditions 
imposed by IMF which more or less forced India to liberalise its economic 
policies. Since then a fairly large amount of liberalisation at the economic front 
has taken place. 

Though the process of reforms has somewhat slowed down, India is very much 
on the path to globalisation and integrating with the world economy. While, on 
the one hand, many multinational corporations (MNCs) have ventured into Indian 
market for selling their products and services; many Indian companies too have 
stepped out of the country to market their products and services to consumers in 
foreign countries.

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   248 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 249

therefore,	be	defined	as	those	business	 11.1.2 Reason for International 
activities that take place across the Business
national frontiers. It involves not The fundamental reason behind 
only the international movements of international business is that the 
goods and services, but also of capital, countries cannot produce equally well 
personnel, technology and intellectual or cheaply all that they need. This is 
property like patents, trademarks, because of the unequal distribution 
know-how and copyrights. of natural resources among them 

It may be mentioned here that or differences in their productivity 
mostly people think of international levels. Availability of various factors 
business as international trade. But of production such as labour, capital 
this is not true. No doubt international and raw materials that are required for 
trade, comprising exports and imports producing different goods and services 
of goods, has historically been an differ among nations. Moreover, labour 
important component of international productivity and production costs 
business. But of late, the scope differ among nations due to various 
of  internat ional  business has socio-economic, geographical and 
substantially expanded. International political reasons.
trade in services such as international Due to these differences, it is not 
travel and tourism, transportation, uncommon to find one particular 
communication, banking, ware- country being in a better position to 
housing, distribution and advertising produce better quality products and/
has considerably grown. The other or at lower costs than what other 
equally important developments are nations can do.  In other words, we 
increased foreign investments and can say that some countries are in an 
overseas production of goods and advantageous position in producing 

select goods and services which 
services. Companies have started other countries cannot produce that 
increasingly making investments into effectively	 and	 efficiently,	 and	 vice-
foreign countries and undertaking versa.	As	a	result,	each	country	finds	it	
production of goods and services in advantageous to produce those select 
foreign countries to come closer to goods and services that it can produce 
foreign customers and serve them more effectively and efficiently at 
more effectively at lower costs. All these home, and procuring the rest through 
activities form part of international trade with other countries which the 
business. To conclude, we can say other countries can produce at lower 
that international business is a much costs.  This is precisely the reason as 
broader term and is comprised of both to why countries trade with others 
the trade and production of goods and and engage in what is known as 
services across frontiers. international business. 

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   249 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM



250 BUSINESS  STUDIES

The international business as it firms	 from	engaging	 in	 international	
exists today is to a great extent the business in a later section. 
result of geographical specialisation as 
pointed out above. Fundamentally, it 11.1.3 International Business vs. 
is for the same reason that domestic Domestic Business
trade between two states or regions 
within a country takes place. Most Conducting and managing international 
states or regions within a country business operations is more complex 
tend to specialise in the production than undertaking domestic business. 
of goods and services for which they Because of variations in political, social, 
are best suited. In India, for example, cultural and economic environments 
while West Bengal specialises in jute across	countries,	business	firms	find	
products; Mumbai and neighbouring it	 difficult	 to	 extend	 their	 domestic	
areas in Maharashtra are more involved business strategy to foreign markets. 
with the production of cotton textiles. To be successful in the overseas 
The same principle of territorial markets, they need to adapt their 
division of labour is applicable at the product, pricing, promotion and 
international level too. Most developing distribution strategies and overall 
countries which are labour abundant, business plans to suit the specific 
for instance, specialise in producing requirements of the target foreign 
and exporting garments. Since they markets (see Box B on Firms need 
lack capital and technology, they to be Cognisant of Environmental 
import textile machinery from the Differences). Key aspects in respect 
developed nations which the latter of which domestic and international 
are in a position to produce more businesses differ from each other are 
efficiently.	 discussed below.

What is true for the nation is more (i) Nationality of buyers and sellers: 
or	less	true	for	firms.	Firms	too	engage	 Nationality of the key participants (i.e., 
in international business to import buyers and sellers) to the business 
what is available at lower prices in deals differs between domestic and 
other countries, and export goods to international businesses. In the case 
other countries where they can fetch of domestic business, both the buyers 
better prices for their products. Besides and sellers are from the same country. 
price considerations, there are several This makes it easier for both the parties 
other	benefits	which	nations	and	firms	 to understand each other and enter 
derive from international business. In into business deals. But this is not the 
a	way,	these	other	benefits	too	provide	 case with international business where 
an	 impetus	 to	 nations	 and	 firms	 to	 buyers and sellers come from different 
engage in international business. We countries. Because of differences 
shall turn our attention to some of in their languages, attitudes, social 
these	benefits	accruing	to	nations	and	 customs and business goals and 

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   250 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 251

practices, it becomes relatively more and aspirations of the stakeholders 
difficult for them to interact with belonging to different nations.
one another and finalise business (iii) Mobility of factors of production: 
transactions. The degree of mobility of factors 
(ii) Nationality of other stakeholders: like labour and capital is generally 
Domestic and international businesses less between countries than within 
also differ in respect of the nationalities a country. While these factors of 
of the other stakeholders such as movement can move freely within 
employees, suppliers, shareholders/ the country, there exist various 
partners and  general public who restrictions to their movement across 
interact	 with	 business	 firms.	While	 nations. Apart from legal restrictions, 
in the case of domestic business all even the variations in socio-cultural 
such factors belong to one country, environments,	 geographic	 influences	
and therefore relatively speaking and economic conditions come in a 
depict more consistency in their value big way in their movement across 
systems and behaviours; decision countries. This is especially true of 
making in international business the	 labour	which	finds	 it	 difficult	 to	
becomes much more complex as the adjust to the climatic, economic and 
concerned business firms have to socio-cultural conditions that differ 
take into account a wider set of values from country to country.

Box B 
Firms need to be Cognisant of Environmental Differences

It is to be kept in mind that conducting and managing international business is not 
an	easy	venture.	It	is	more	difficult	to	manage	international	business	operations	
due to variations in the political, social, cultural and economic environments that 
differ from country to country. 

Simply	being	aware	of	these	differences	is	not	sufficient.	One	also	needs	to	
be sensitive and responsive to these changes by way of introducing adaptations 
in their marketing programmes and business strategies. It is, for instance, a well 
known fact that because of poor lower per capita income, consumers in most of the 
developing African and Asian countries are price sensitive and prefer to buy less 
expensive products. But consumers in the developed countries like Japan, United 
States, Canada, France, Germany and Switzerland have a marked preference for 
high quality and high priced products due to their better ability to pay. Business 
prudence,	 therefore,	 demands	 that	 the	 firms	 interested	 in	marketing	 to	 these	
countries are aware of such differences among the countries, and design their 
strategies	accordingly.	It	will	be	in	the	fitness	of	things	if	the	firms	interested	in	
exporting to these countries produce less expensive products for the consumers 
in the African and Asian regions, and design and develop high quality products 
for consumers in Japan and most of the European and North American countries.

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   251 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM



252 BUSINESS  STUDIES

(iv) Customer heterogeneity across Countries differ from one another 
markets: Since buyers in international in terms of their socio-economic 
markets hail from different countries, development, availability, cost and 
they differ in their socio-cultural efficiency	 of	 economic	 infrastructure	
background. Differences in their and market support services, and 
tastes, fashions, languages, beliefs business customs and practices due 
and customs, attitudes and product to their socio-economic milieu and 
preferences cause variations in historical coincidences. All such 
not only their demand for different differences make it necessary for 
products and services, but also in firms interested in entering into 
variations in their communication international markets to adapt 
patterns and purchase behaviours. their production, finance, human 
It is precisely because of the socio- resource and marketing plans as 
cultural differences that while people per the conditions prevailing in the 
in China prefer bicycles, the Japanese international markets.  
in contrast like to ride bikes.  Similarly, (vi) Political system and risks: 
while people in India use right-hand Political factors such as the type of 
driven	cars,	Americans	drive	cars	fitted	 government, political party system, 
with steering, brakes, etc., on the left political ideology, political risks, etc., 
side. Moreover, while people in the have a profound impact on business 
United States change their TV, bike operations. Since a business person is 
and other consumer durables very familiar with the political environment 
frequently — within two to three years of his/her country, he/she can well 
of their purchase, Indians mostly do understand it and predict its impact 
not go in for such replacements until on business operations. But this is not 
the products currently with them have the case with international business. 
totally worn out. Political environment differs from 

Such variations greatly complicate one country to another. One needs 
the task of designing products and to make special efforts to understand 
evolving strategies appropriate for the differing political environments 
customers in different countries. and their business implications. 
Though to some extent customers Since political environment keeps 
within a country too differ in their on changing, one needs to monitor 
tastes and preferences.  These political changes on an ongoing 
differences become more striking when basis in the concerned countries and 
we compare customers across nations. devise strategies to deal with diverse 
(v) Differences in business systems political risks.
and practices: The differences in A major problem with a foreign 
business systems and practices are country’s political environment is a 
considerably much more among tendency among nations to favour 
countries than within a country. products and services originating in 

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   252 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 253

their own countries to those coming international trade. It includes not only 
from other countries. While this is not international trade (i.e., export and 
a	problem	for	business	firms	operating	 import of goods and services), but also 
domestically, it quite often becomes a a wide variety of other ways in which 
severe	problem	for	the	firms	interested	 the firms operate internationally. 
in exporting their goods and services to Major forms of business operations 
other nations or setting up their plants that constitute international business 
in the overseas markets. are as follows. 
(vii) Business regulations and (i) Merchandise exports and imports: 
policies: Coupled with its socio- Merchandise means goods that are 
economic environment and political tangible, i.e., those that can be seen 
philosophy, each country evolves and touched. When viewed from 
its own set of business laws and this perceptive, it is clear that while 
regulations. Though these laws, merchandise exports means sending 
regulations and economic policies are tangible goods abroad, merchandise 
more or less uniformly applicable within imports means bringing tangible 
a country, they differ widely among goods from a foreign country to one’s 
nations. Tariff and taxation policies, own country. Merchandise exports 
import quota system, subsidies and and imports, also known as trade in 
other controls adopted by a nation goods, include only tangible goods and 
are not the same as in other countries exclude trade in services.
and often discriminate against foreign (ii) Service exports and imports: 
products, services and capital. Service exports and imports involve 
 (viii) Currency used in business trade in intangibles. It is because 
transactions: Another important of the intangible aspect of services 
difference between domestic and that trade in services is also known 
international business is that the latter as invisible trade. A wide variety of 
involves the use of different currencies. services are traded internationally 
Since the exchange rate, i.e., the and these include: tourism and 
price of one currency expressed in travel, boarding and lodging (hotel 
relation to that of another country’s and restaurants), entertainment 
currency, keeps on fluctuating, it and recreation, transportation, 
adds to the problems of international professional services (such as training, 
business	firms	in	fixing	prices	of	their 	 recruitment, consultancy and research), 
products and hedging against foreign communication (postal, telephone, 
exchange risks. fax, courier and other audio-visual 
11.1.4 Scope of International services), construction and engineering, 

Business marketing (e.g., wholesaling, retailing, 
advertising, marketing research 

As pointed out earlier, international and warehousing), educational and 
business is much broader than financial	 services	 (such	 as	 banking 

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   253 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM



254 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Table 11.1    Major Difference between Domestic 
       and International Business

Basis Domestic business International business

1. Nationality of People or organisations Peop le  o r  o rgan isa t ions  o f 
buyers and f r o m  o n e  n a t i o n different countries participate 
sellers participate in domestic i n  i n t e r n a t i o n a l  b u s i n e s s 

business transactions. transactions.

2. Nationality Various other stake- Various other stakeholders such as 
of other   holders such as suppliers, suppliers, employees, middlemen, 
stakeholders employees, middlemen, shareholders and partners are from 

shareholders and partners different nations.
are usually citizens of the 
same country.

3. Mobility of The degree of mobility The degree of mobility of factors of 
factors of  of factors of production production like labour and capital 
production like labour and capital is across nations is relatively less.

relatively more within a 
country.

4. Customer   Domestic markets International markets lack 
heterogeneity are relatively more homogeneity due to differences in 
across markets homogeneous in nature. language, preferences, customs, 

etc., across markets.

5. Differences  Business systems and Business systems and practices 
in business practices are relatively vary considerably across countries.
systems and  more homogeneous within 
practices a country.

6. Political  Domestic business is Different countries have different 
system and subject to political system forms of political systems and 
risks and risks of one single different degrees of risks which often 

country. become a barrier to international 
business.

7. Business  Domestic business is International business transactions 
regulations subject to rules, laws and are subject to rules, laws and 
and policies policies, taxation system, policies, tariffs and quotas, etc. of 

etc., of a single country. multiple countries. 

8. Currency used Currency of domestic International business transactions 
in business  country is used. involve use of currencies of more 
transactions than one country.

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   254 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 255

and insurance). Of these, tourism, (iv) Foreign investments: Foreign 
transportation and business services investment is another important form 
are major constituents of world trade of international business. Foreign 
in services (see Box C). investment involves investments 
(iii) Licensing and franchising: of funds abroad in exchange for 
Permitting another party in a foreign financial	 return.	 Foreign	 investment	
country to produce and sell goods can be of two types: direct and portfolio 
under your trademarks, patents or copy investments.
rights in lieu of some fee is another way Direct investment takes place 
of entering into international business. when a company directly invests 
It is under the licensing system that in properties such as plant and 
Pepsi and Coca Cola are produced and machinery in foreign countries with a 
sold all over the world by local bottlers view to undertaking production and 
in foreign countries. Franchising is marketing of goods and services in 
similar to licensing, but it is a term those countries. Direct investment 
used in connection with the provision provides the investor a controlling 
of services. McDonalds, for instance, interest in a foreign company, known 
operates fast food restaurants the as Direct Investment, i.e., FDI. It can 
world over through its franchising be in the form of joint venture on PPP. 
system. A company, if it so desires, can also set 

Box C 
Tourism, Transportation and Business Services dominate 

International Trade in Services
Tourism and transportation have emerged as major components of international 
trade in services. Most of the airlines, shipping companies, travel agencies and 
hotels get their major share of revenues from their overseas customers and 
operations abroad. Several countries have come to heavily depend on services as an 
important source of foreign exchange earnings and employment. India, for example, 
earns a sizeable amount of foreign exchange from exports of services related to 
travel and tourism.
Business services: When one country provides services to other country and in 
the process earns foreign exchange, this is also treated as a form of international 
business activity. Fee received for services like banking, insurance, rentals, 
engineering and management services form part of country’s foreign exchange 
earnings. Undertaking of construction projects in foreign countries is also an 
example of export of business services. The other examples of such services  include 
overseas management contracts where arrangements are made by one company of 
a country which provides personnel to perform general or specialised management 
functions for another company in a foreign country in lieu of the other country.

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   255 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM



256 BUSINESS  STUDIES

up a wholly owned subsidiary abroad capital goods, technology, petroleum 
by making 100 per cent investment in products and fertilisers, pharma-
foreign ventures, and thus acquiring ceutical products and a host of other 
full control over subsidiary’s operations consumer products which otherwise 
in the foreign market. might not be available domestically.

A portfolio investment, on the other (ii) More efficient use of resources: 
hand, is an investment that a company As stated earlier, international business 
makes into another company by the operates on a simple principle —
way of acquiring shares or providing produce what your country can 
loans to the latter, and earns income by produce	more	efficiently,	and	trade	the	
way of dividends or interest on loans. surplus production so generated with 
Unlike foreign direct investments, the other countries to procure what they 
investor under portfolio investment can	 produce	more	 efficiently.	When	
does not get directly involved into countries trade on this principle, they 
production and marketing operations. end up producing much more than 
It simply earns an income by investing what they can when each of them 
in shares, bonds, bills, or notes in a attempts to produce all the goods 
foreign country or providing loans to and services on its own. If such an 
foreign	business	firms. enhanced pool of goods and services is 

distributed equitably amongst nations, 
11.1.5 Benefits of International it	benefits	all	the	trading	nations.	

Business (iii) Improving growth prospects and 
Notwithstanding greater complexities employment potentials: Producing 
and risks, international business is solely for the purposes of domestic 
important to both nations and business consumption severely restricts 
firms.	 It	 offers	 them	several	benefits.	 a country’s prospects for growth 
Growing	 realisation	 of	 these	benefits	 and employment. Many countries, 
over time has in fact been a contributory especially the developing ones, could 
factor to the expansion of trade and not execute their plans to produce 

on a larger scale, and thus create 
investment amongst nations, resulting employment for people because their 
in the phenomenon of globalisation. domestic market was not large enough 
Some	of	the	benefits	of	 international	 to absorb all that extra production. 
business to the nations and business Later on a few countries such as 
firms	are	discussed	below. Singapore, South Korea and China 
Benefits to Countries which saw markets for their products 

in the foreign countries embarked upon 
(i) Earning of foreign exchange: the	strategy	‘export	and	flourish’,	and	
International business helps a country soon became the star performers on the 
to earn foreign exchange which it can world map. This helped them not only 
later use for meeting its imports of in improving their growth prospects, 

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   256 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 257

but also created opportunities for improve prospects of their growth by 
employment of people living in these plunging into overseas markets. This is 
countries. precisely what has prompted many of 
(iv) Increased standard of living: the multinationals from the developed 
In the absence of international trade countries to enter into markets of 
of goods and services, it would not developing countries. While demand 
have been possible for the world in their home countries has got almost 
community to consume goods and saturated, they realised their products 
services produced in other countries were in demand in the developing 
that the people in these countries are countries and demand was picking 
able to consume and enjoy a higher up quite fast.
standard of living. (iv) Way   out   to   intense 

competition in domestic market: 
Benefits to Firms W h e n  c o m p e t i t i o n  i n  t h e 
(i) Prospects for higher profits: domestic market is very intense, 
International business can be more internationalisation seems to be 
profitable	than	the	domestic	business.	 the	 only	 way	 to	 achieve	 significant	
When the domestic prices are lower, growth. Highly competitive domestic 
business	firms	can	earn	more	profits	 market drives many companies to go 
by selling their products in countries international in search of markets for 
where prices are high. their products. International business 
(ii) Increased capacity utilisation: thus acts as a catalyst of growth for 
Many f i rms setup product ion firms	facing	tough	market	conditions	
capacities for their products which on the domestic turf. 
are in excess of demand in the (v) Improved business vision: The 
domestic market. By planning overseas growth of international business of 
expansion and procuring orders from many companies is essentially a part 
foreign customers, they can think of of their business policies or strategic 

management. The vision to become 
making use of their surplus production international comes from the urge 
capacities and also improving the to grow, the need to become more 
profitability of their operations. competitive, the need to diversify 
Production on a larger scale often leads and to gain strategic advantages of 
to economies of scale, which in turn internationalisation.
lowers production cost and improves 
per	unit	profit	margin.
(iii) Prospects for growth: 11.2 Modes of entry Into 

 Business 
firms	 find	 it	 quite	 frustrating	when	 InternatIonal BusIness

demand for their products starts Simply speaking, the term mode 
getting saturated in the domestic means the manner or way. The phrase 
market.	Such	firms	can	considerably	 ‘modes of entry into international 

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   257 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM



258 BUSINESS  STUDIES

business’, therefore, means various of overseas customers located in the 
ways in which a company can enter home country or wholesale importers 
into international business. While in the case of import operations. Such 
discussing the meaning and scope firms	do	not	directly	deal	with	overseas	
of international business, we have customers in the case of exports and 
already familiarised you with some of suppliers in the case of imports.
the modes of entry into international 
business. In the following sections, Advantages
we shall discuss in detail important Major advantages of exporting include:
ways of entering into international 	 •	 As	 compared	 to	 other	modes	 of	
business along with their advantages entry, exporting/importing is the 
and limitations. Such a discussion easiest way of gaining entry into 
will enable you to know as to which international markets. It is less 
mode is more suitable under what complex an activity than setting 
conditions. up and managing joint-ventures 

or wholly owned subsidiaries 
11.2.1 Exporting and Importing abroad.
Exporting refers to sending of goods 	 •	 Exporting/importing	 is	 less	
and services from the home country involving in the sense that 
to a foreign country. In a similar business	firms	are	not	 required	
vein, importing is purchase of foreign to invest that much time and 
products and bringing them into money as is needed when they 
one’s home country. There are two desire to enter into joint ventures 
important	ways	 in	which	a	firm	can	 or set up manufacturing plants 
export or import products: direct and and facilities in host countries. 
indirect exporting/importing. In the 	 •	 Since	 exporting/importing	 does	
case of direct exporting/importing, not require much of investment 
a	firm	itself	approaches	the	overseas	 in foreign countries, exposure to 
buyers/suppliers and looks after all foreign investment risks is nil or 
the formalities related to exporting/ much lower than that is present 
importing activities including those when	firms	opt	for	other	modes	of	
related	to	shipment	and	financing	of	 entry into international business.
goods and services. Indirect exporting/ Limitations
importing, on the other hand, is one 
where the firm’s participation in Major limitations of exporting/
the export/import operations is importing as an entry mode of 
minimum, and most of the tasks international business are as follows: 
relating to export/import of the goods 	 •	 Since	the	goods	physically	move	
are carried out by some middle men from one country to another, 
such	as	export	houses	or	buying	offices	 exporting/importing involves 

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   258 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 259

additional packaging, trans- Despite the above mentioned 
portation and insurance costs. limitations, exporting/importing is 
Especially in the case of heavy the most preferred way for business 
items, transportation costs alone firms	when	 they	 are	 getting	 initially	
become an inhibiting factor to their involved with international business. 
exports and imports. On reaching As usually is the case, firms start 
the shores of foreign countries, their overseas operations with exports 
such products are subject to and imports, and later having gained 
custom duty and a variety of familiarity with the foreign market 
other levies and charges. Taken operations switch over to other forms 
together, all these expenses and of international business operations.  
payments substantially increase 
product costs and make them less 11.2.2 Contract Manufacturing 
competitive.

	 •	 Exporting	is	not	a	feasible	option	 Contract manufacturing refers to a 
when import restrictions exist type of international business where 
in a foreign country. In such a a	firm	enters	into	a	contract	with	one	
situation,	firms	have	no	alternative	 or a few local manufacturers in foreign 
but to opt for other entry modes countries to get certain components or 
such as licensing/franchising goods	produced	as	per	its	specifications.	
or joint venture which makes Contract manufacturing, also known 
it feasible to make the product as outsourcing, can take three major 
available by way of producing forms:
and marketing it locally in foreign 	 •	 Production	of	certain	components	
countries. such as automobile components 

	 •	 Export	 firms	 basically	 operate	 or shoe uppers to be used later for 
from their home country. They producing	final	products	such	as	
produce in the home country and cars and shoes;
then ship the goods to foreign 	 •	 Assembly	of	components	into	final	
countries. Except a few visits products such as assembly of 
made by the executives of export hard	disk,	mother	board,	floppy	
firms to foreign countries to disk drive and modem chip into 
promote their products, the export computers; and
firms	in	general	do	not	have	much	 	 •	 Complete	 manufacture	 of	 the	
contact with the foreign markets. products such as garments.
This puts the export firms in The goods are produced or assembled 
a disadvan-tageous position vis- by the local manufacturers as per the 
à-vis	 the	 local	 firms	which	 are	 technology and management guidance 
very near the customers and are provided to them by the foreign 
able to better understand and company. The goods so manufactured 
serve them. or assembled by the local producers 

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   259 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



260 BUSINESS  STUDIES

are delivered to the international any idle production capacities, 
firm	 for	 use	 in	 its	 final	 products	 or	 manufacturing jobs obtained on 
out	rightly	sold	as	finished	products	 contract basis in a way provide a 
by	 the	 international	 firm	 under	 its	 ready market for their products 
brand names in various countries and ensure greater utilisation of 
including the home, host and other their production capacities. This is 
countries. All the major international how	the	Godrej	group	is	benefitting	
companies such as Nike, Reebok, from contract manufacturing 
Levis and Wrangler today get their in India. It is manufacturing 
products or components produced soaps under contract for many 
in the developing countries under multinationals including Dettol 
contract manufacturing. soap for Reckitt and Colman. 

This has considerably helped it 
Advantages in making use of its excess soap 
Contract manufacturing offers several manufacturing capacity.
advantages to both the international 	 •	 The local manufacturer also gets 
company and local producers in the the opportunity to get involved 
foreign countries. with international business and 
	 •	 Contract	manufacturing	permits	 avail incentives, if any, available 

the	international	firms	to	get	the	 to	 the	 export	 firms	 in	 case	 the	
goods produced on a large scale international	firm	desires	goods	so	
without requiring investment in produced  be delivered to its home 
setting up production facilities. country or to some other foreign 
These firms make use of the countries.
production facilities already 
existing in the foreign countries. Limitations

	 •	 Since	there	is	no	or	little	investment	 The major disadvantages of contract 
in the foreign countries, there manufacturing	 to	 international	 firm	
is hardly any investment risk and local producer in foreign countries 
involved in the foreign countries. are as follows:

	 •	 Contract manufacturing also gives 	 •	 Local	firms	might	not	adhere	 to	
an advantage to the international production design and quality 
company of getting products standards, thus causing serious 
manufactured or assembled at product quality problems to the 
lower costs especially if the local international	firm.	
producers happen to be situated 	 •	 Local	manufacturer	in	the	foreign	
in countries which have lower country loses his control over the 
material and labour costs. manufacturing process because 

	 •	 Local producers in foreign goods are produced strictly as per 
countries also gain from contract the	terms	and	specifications	of	the	
manufacturing. If they have contract.

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   260 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 261

	 •	 The	 local	 firm	producing	under	 licensing. Franchisers usually set 
contract manufacturing is not strict rules and regulations as to how 
free to sell the contracted output the franchisees should operate while 
as per its will. It has to sell running their business.  Barring these 
the goods to the international two differences, franchising is pretty 
company at predetermined prices. much the same as licensing.  Like in 
This	 results	 in	 lower	 profits	 for	 the case of licensing, a franchising 
the	local	firm	if	the	open	market	 agreement too involves grant of rights 
prices for such goods happen to by one party to another for use of 
be higher than the prices agreed technology, trademark and patents 
upon under the contract. in return of the agreed payment for 

a certain period of time. The parent 
11.2.3 Licensing and Franchising company is called the franchiser and 
Licensing is a contractual arrangement the other party to the agreement is 
in which	one	firm	grants	access	to	its	 called franchisee. The franchiser 
patents, trade secrets or technology to can be any service provider be it a 
another	firm	in	a	foreign	country	for	a	 restaurant, hotel, travel agency, bank 
fee	called	royalty.	The	firm	that	grants	 wholesaler or even a retailer - who 
such	permission	to	 the	other	firm	is	 has developed a unique technique for 
known as licensor and	the	other	firm	in	 creating and marketing of services 
the foreign country that acquires such under its own name and trade mark. It 
rights to use technology or patents is is the uniqueness of the technique that 
called the licensee. It may be mentioned gives the franchiser an edge over its 
here that it is not only technology that competitors	in	the	field,	and	makes	the	
is licensed. In the fashion industry, a would-be-service providers interested 
number of designers license the use in joining the franchising system. 
of their names. In some cases, there McDonald, Pizza Hut and Wal-Mart 
is exchange of technology between the are examples of some of the leading 
two	firms.	Sometimes	there	is	mutual	 franchisers operating worldwide. 
exchange of knowledge, technology 
and/or patents between the firms Advantages
which is known as cross-licensing. As compared to joint ventures and 

Franchising is a term very similar wholly owned subsidiaries, licensing/
to licensing. One major distinction franchising is relatively a much easier 
between the two is that while the mode of entering into foreign markets 
former is used in connection with with proven product/technology 
production and marketing of goods, without much business risks and 
the term franchising applies to service investments. Some of the specific 
business. The other point of difference advantages of licensing are as follows: 
between the two is that franchising 	 •	 Under	 the	 licensing/franchising	
is relatively more stringent than system, it is the l icensor/

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   261 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



262 BUSINESS  STUDIES

franchiser who sets up the and brand names in foreign 
business unit and invests his/her countries.	As	a	result,	other	firms	
own money in the business. As in the foreign market cannot 
such, the licensor/franchiser has make use of such trademarks and 
to virtually make no investments patents. 
abroad. Licensing/franchising 
is, therefore, considered a less Limitations
expensive mode of entering into 
international business. Licensing/franchising as a mode of 

	 •	 Since	 no	 or	 very	 little	 foreign	 international business suffers from the 
investment is involved, licensor/ following weaknesses.
franchiser is not a party to the 	 •	 When	 a	 licensee/franchisee	
losses, if any, that occur to foreign becomes skilled in the manu-
business. Licensor/franchiser is facture and marketing of the 
paid by the licensee/franchisee by licensed/franchised products, 
way	of	 fees	fixed	 in	advance	as	a	 there is a danger that the licensee 
percentage of production or sales can start marketing an identical 
turnover. This royalty or fee keeps product under a slightly different 
accruing to the licensor/franchiser brand name. This can cause 
so long as the production and severe competition to the licenser/
sales keep on taking place in the franchiser. 
licensee’s/franchisee’s business 	 •	 If	not	maintained	properly,	trade	
unit. secrets can get divulged to others 

	 •	 Since	the	business	in	the	foreign	 in the foreign markets. Such 
country is managed by the lapses on the part of the licensee/
licensee/franchisee who is a local franchisee can cause severe 
person, there are lower risks of losses to the licensor/franchiser.
business takeovers or government 	 •	 Over	time,	conflicts	often	develop	
interventions. between the licensor/franchiser 

	 •	 Licensee/franchisee	 being	 a	 and licensee/franchisee over 
local person has greater market issues such as maintenance of 
k n o w l e d g e  a n d  c o n t a c t s accounts, payment of royalty and 
which can prove quite helpful non-adherence to norms relating 
to the licensor/franchiser in to production of quality products. 
successfully conducting its These differences often result in 
marketing operations. costly litigations, causing harm to 

	 •	 As	per	the	terms	of	the	licensing/
franchising agreement, only the both the parties. 
parties to the licensing/franchising 
agreement are legally entitled 11.2.4 Joint Ventures
to make use of the licensor’s/ Joint venture is a very common 
franchiser’s copyrights, patents strategy for entering into foreign 

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   262 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 263

markets.  A joint venture means local partner under joint venture 
establishing a firm that is jointly agreements. 
owned by two or more otherwise 
independent	firms.	In	the	widest	sense	 Limitations
of the term, it can also be described Major limitations of a joint venture are 
as any form of association which discussed below: 
implies collaboration for more than a 
transitory period. A joint ownership 	 •	 Foreign	firms	entering	into	joint	
venture may be brought about in three ventures share the technology 
major ways: and trade secrets with local 
 (i) Foreign investor buying an firms	 in	 foreign	 countries,	 thus	

interest in a local company always running the risks of such 
	 (ii)	 Local	 firm	acquiring	an	 interest	 a technology and secrets being 

in	an	existing	foreign	firm	 disclosed to others. 
 (iii) Both the foreign and local 	 •	 The	dual	ownership	arrangement	

entrepreneurs jointly forming a may	 lead	 to	 conflicts,	 resulting	
new enterprise. in battle for control between the 

investing	firms.	
Advantages

11.2.5  Wholly Owned Subsidiaries
Major advantages of joint venture 
include: This entry mode of international 
	 •	 Since	 the	 local	 partner	 also	 business is preferred by companies 

contributes to the equity capital of which want to exercise full control over 
such a venture, the international their overseas operations. The parent 
firm finds it financially less company acquires full control over the 
burdensome to expand globally.  foreign company by making 100 per 

	 •	 Joint	ventures	make	it	possible	to	 cent investment in its equity capital. 
execute large projects requiring A wholly owned subsidiary in a foreign 
huge  cap i ta l  out lays  and market can be established in either of 
manpower. the two ways:  

	 •	 The	foreign	business	firm	benefits	 	 (i)	 Setting	up	a	new	firm	altogether	
from a local partner’s knowledge to start operations in a foreign 
of the host countries regarding the country — also referred to as a 
competitive conditions, culture, green	field	venture,	or		
language, political systems and 
business systems. 	 (ii)	 Acquiring	an	established	firm	in	

	 •	 In	many	 cases	 entering	 into	 a	 the foreign country and using 
foreign market is very costly and that	firm	to	manufacture	and/or	
risky. This can be avoided by promote its products in the host 
sharing costs and/or risks with a nation. 

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   263 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



264 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Advantages 11.3 export-IMport procedures 
Major advantages of a wholly owned and docuMentatIon

subsidiary in a foreign country are as A major distinction between domestic 
follows: and international operations is the 
	 •	 The	parent	firm	is	able	to	exercise	 complexity of the latter. Export and 

import of goods is not that straight 
full control over its operations in forward as buying and selling in the 
foreign countries. domestic market. Since foreign trade 

	 •	 Since	 the	 parent	 company	 on	 transactions involves movement 
its own looks after the entire of goods across frontiers and use 
operations of foreign subsidiary, of foreign exchange, a number of 
it is not required to disclose its formalities are needed to be performed 
technology or trade secrets to before the goods leave the boundaries 
others. of a country and enter into that of 

another. Following sections are devoted 
Limitations to a discussion of major steps that 
The limitations of setting up a wholly need to be undertaken for completing 
owned subsidiary abroad include:   export and import transactions. 

	 •	 The	parent	company	has	to	make	 11.3.1 Export Procedure
100 per cent equity investments 
in the foreign subsidiaries. This The number of steps and the sequence 
form of international business is, in which these are taken vary from one 

export transaction to another. Steps 
therefore, not suitable for small involved in a typical export transaction 
and	medium	size	firms	which	do	 are as follows.
not have enough funds with them (i) Receipt of enquiry and sending 
to invest abroad. quotations: The prospective buyer 

	 •	 Since	the	parent	company	owns	 of a product sends an enquiry to 
100 per cent equity in the foreign different exporters requesting them 
company, it alone has to bear the to send information regarding price, 
entire losses resulting from failure quality and terms and conditions 
of its foreign operations. for export of goods. Exporters can 

	 •	 Some	 countries	 are	 averse	 to	 be informed of such an enquiry even 
setting up of 100 per cent wholly by way of advertisement in the press 
owned subsidiaries by foreigners put in by the importer. The exporter 
in their countries. This form of sends a reply to the enquiry in the 
international business operations, form of a quotation —referred to as 
therefore, becomes subject to proforma invoice. The proforma invoice 
higher political risks.  contains information about the price at 

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   264 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 265

which the exporter is ready to sell the export licence before it proceeds with 
goods and also provides information exports. Important pre-requisites for 
about the quality, grade, size, weight, getting an export licence are as follows:
mode of delivery, type of packing and 	 •	 Opening	a	bank	account	 in	any	
payment terms. bank authorised by the Reserve 
(ii) Receipt of order or indent: In case Bank of India (RBI) and getting 
the prospective buyer (i.e., importing an account number.
firm)	finds	the	export	price	and	other	 	 •	 Obtaining	 Import	 Export	 Code	
terms and conditions acceptable, it (IEC) number from the Directorate 
places an order for the goods to be General Foreign Trade (DGFT) or 
despatched. This order, also known Regional Import Export Licensing 
as indent, contains a description of Authority.  
the goods ordered, prices to be paid, 	 •	 Registering	 with	 appropriate	
delivery terms, packing and marking export promotion council.
details and delivery instructions. 	 •	 Registering	with	Export	Credit	and	
(iii) Assessing the importer’s Guarantee Corporation (ECGC) in 
creditworthiness and securing order to safeguard against risks of 
a guarantee for payments: After non payments.
receipt of the indent, the exporter An	export	firm	needs	to	have	the	
makes necessary enquiry about the Import Export Code (IEC) number as 
creditworthiness of the importer. The it	needs	to	be	filled	in	various	export/
purpose underlying the enquiry is to import documents. For obtaining 
assess the risks of non payment by the	IEC	number,	a	firm	has	to	apply	
the importer once the goods reach the to the Director General for Foreign 
import destination. To minimise such Trade (DGFT) with documents such as 
risks, most exporters demand a letter exporter/importer	profile,	bank	receipt	
of credit from the importer. A letter for	 requisite	 fee,	 certificate	 from	 the	
of credit is a guarantee issued by the banker on the prescribed form, two 
importer’s bank that it will honour copies of photographs attested by the 
payment up to a certain amount of banker, details of the non-resident 
export bills to the bank of the exporter. interest and declaration about the 
Letter of credit is the most appropriate applicant’s non association with 
and secure method of payment adopted caution	listed	firms.	
to settle international transactions. It is obligatory for every exporter 
(iv) Obtaining export licence: Having to get registered with the appropriate 
become assured about payments, export promotion council. Various 
the	exporting	firm	initiates	the	steps	 export promotion councils such as 
relating to compliance of export Engineering Export Promotion Council 
regulations. Export of goods in India is (EEPC) and Apparel Export Promotion 
subject to custom laws which demand Council (AEPC) have been set up by the 
that	 the	 export	 firm	must	 have	 an	 Government of India to promote and 

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   265 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



266 BUSINESS  STUDIES

develop exports of different categories quality products are exported from the 
of products. We shall discuss about country. One such step is compulsory 
export promotion councils in a later inspection of certain products by a 
section. But it may be mentioned here competent agency as designated by 
that it is necessary for the exporter to the government. The government has 
become a member of the appropriate passed Export Quality Control and 
export promotion council and obtain Inspection Act, 1963 for this purpose. 
a Registration cum Membership and has authorised some agencies 
Certificate	(RCMC)	for	availing	benefits	 to act as inspection agencies. If the 
available to export firms from the product to be exported comes under 
Government. such a category, the exporter needs to 

Registration with the ECGC contact the Export Inspection Agency 
is necessary in order to protect (EIA) or the other designated agency 
overseas payments from political and for	 obtaining	 inspection	 certificate.	
commercial risks. Such a registration The pre-shipment inspection report 
also	helps	 the	 export	firm	 in	getting	 is required to be submitted along 
financial	assistance	from	commercial	 with other export documents at the 
banks	and	other	financial	institutions.	 time of exports. Such an inspection 
(v) Obtaining pre-shipment finance: is not compulsory in case the goods 
Once	 a	 confirmed	 order	 and	 also	 a	 are being exported by star trading 
letter of credit have been received, houses, trading houses, export houses, 
the exporter approaches his banker industrial units setup in export 
for	 obtaining	 pre-shipment	 finance	 processing zones/special economic 
to undertake export production. Pre- zones (EPZs/SEZs) and 100 per cent 
shipment	finance	 is	 the	finance	that	 export oriented units (EOUs). We shall 
the exporter needs for procuring raw discuss about these special types of 
materials and other components, export	firms	in	a	later	section.
processing and packing of goods and (viii)  Excise clearance: As per the 
transportation of goods to the port of Central Excise Tariff Act, excise 
shipment.  duty is payable on the materials 
(vi) Production or procurement used in manufacturing goods. The 
of goods: Having obtained the pre- exporter, therefore, has to apply to 
shipment	finance	from	the	bank,	the	 the concerned Excise Commissioner 
exporter proceeds to get the goods in the region with an invoice. If the 
ready	as	per	the	specifications	of	the	 Excise Commissioner is satisfied, 
importer.	Either	the	firm	itself	goes	in	 he may issue the excise clearance. 
for producing the goods or else it buys But in many cases the government 
from the market. exempts payment of excise duty or 
(vii) Pre-shipment inspection: The later on refunds it if the goods so 
Government of India has initiated manufactured are meant for exports. 
many steps to ensure that only good The idea underlying such exemption 

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   266 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 267

or refund is to provide an incentive to captain	of	the	ship	that	the	specified	
the exporters to export more and also goods after their customs clearance at 
to make the export products more a designated port be received on board. 
competitive in the world markets. (xi) Packing and forwarding: The 
The refund of excise duty is known as goods are then properly packed and 
duty drawback. This scheme of duty marked with necessary details such 
drawback is presently administered as name and address of the importer, 
by the Directorate of Drawback under gross and net weight, port of shipment 
the Ministry of Finance which is and destination, country of origin, etc. 
responsible for fixing the rates of The exporter then makes necessary 
drawback for different products.  The arrangement for transportation of 
work relating to sanction and payment goods to the port. On loading goods 
of drawback is, however, looked after into the railway wagon, the railway 
by the Commissioner of Customs authorities issue a ‘railway receipt’ 
or Central Excise Incharge of the which serves as a title to the goods. The 
concerned port/airport/land custom exporter endorses the railway receipt 
station from where the export of goods in favour of his agent to enable him 
is considered to have taken place. to take delivery of goods at the port of 
(ix) Obtaining certificate of origin: shipment. 
Some importing countries provide (xii) Insurance of goods: The exporter 
tariff concessions or other exemptions then gets the goods insured with an 
to the goods coming from a particular insurance company to protect against 
country.	For	availing	such	benefits,	the	 the risks of loss or damage of the goods 
importer may ask the exporter to send due to the perils of the sea during the 
a certificate of origin.	The	certificate	of	 transit. 
origin acts as a proof that the goods (xiii) Customs clearance: The goods 
have actually been manufactured in must be cleared from the customs 
the country from where the export before these can be loaded on the ship. 
is	 taking	 place.	 This	 certificate	 can	 For obtaining customs clearance, the 
be obtained from the trade consulate exporter prepares the shipping bill. 
located in the exporter’s country.  Shipping bill is the main document 
(x) Reservation of shipping space: on the basis of which the customs 
The exporting firm applies to the office	gives	the	permission	for	export.	
shipping company for provision of Shipping bill contains particulars of 
shipping space. It has to specify the goods being exported, the name 
the types of goods to be exported, of the vessel, the port at which goods 
probable date of shipment and the are	to	be	discharged,	country	of	final	
port of destination. On acceptance of destination, exporter’s name and 
application for shipping, the shipping address, etc.  
company issues a shipping order. A Five copies of the shipping bill 
shipping order is an instruction to the along with the following documents 

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   267 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



268 BUSINESS  STUDIES

are then submitted to the Customs (xv) Payment of freight and issuance 
Appraiser at the Customs House: of bill of lading: The C&F agent 
	 •	 Export	Contract	or	Export	Order surrenders the mates receipt to the 
	 •	 Letter	of	Credit	 shipping company for computation of 
	 •	 Commercial	Invoice freight. After receipt of the freight, the 
	 •	 Certificate	of	Origin shipping company issues a bill of lading 
	 •	 Certificate	 of	 Inspection,	where	 which serves as an evidence that the 

necessary shipping company has accepted the 
	 •	 Marine	Insurance	Policy	 goods for carrying to the designated 

A f te r  submiss ion  o f  these destination. In the case the goods are 
documents, the Superintendent of the being sent by air, this document is 
concerned port trust is approached for referred to as airway bill. 
obtaining the carting order. Carting (xvi) Preparation of invoice: After 
order is the instruction to the staff sending the goods, an invoice of the 
at the gate of the port to permit the despatched goods is prepared. The 
entry of the cargo inside the dock. invoice states the quantity of goods 
After obtaining the carting order, the sent and the amount to be paid by the 
cargo is physically moved into the port importer. The C&F agent gets it duly 
area and stored in the appropriate attested by the customs. 
shed. Since the exporter cannot make (xvii) Securing payment: After 
himself or herself available all the time the shipment  of goods, the exporter 
for performing all these formalities, informs the importer about the 
these tasks are entrusted to an shipment of goods. The importer 
agent —referred to as Clearing and needs various documents to claim 
Forwarding (C&F) agent. the title of goods on their arrival at 
(xiv) Obtaining mates receipt: The his/her country and getting them 
goods are then loaded on board the customs cleared. The documents 
ship for which the mate or the captain that are needed in this connection 
of the ship issues mate’s receipt to the include	certified	copy	of	invoice,	bill	of	
port superintendent. A mate receipt is lading, packing list, insurance policy, 
a receipt issued by the commanding certificate	of	origin	and	letter	of	credit.	
officer of the ship when the cargo The exporter sends these documents 
is loaded on board, and contains through his/her banker with the 
the information about the name of instruction that these may be delivered 
the vessel, berth, date of shipment, to the importer after acceptance of the 
descripton of packages, marks and bill of exchange — a document which is 
numbers, condition of the cargo at the sent along with the above mentioned 
time of receipt on board the ship, etc. documents. Submission of the relevant 
The port superintendent, on receipt documents to the bank for the purpose 
of port dues, hands over the mate’s of getting the payment from the bank is 
receipt to the C&F agent. called ‘negotiation of the documents’. 

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   268 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 269

Bill of exchange is an order to says that the necessary documents 
the importer to pay a certain amount (including bill of exchange) relating to 
of money to, or to the order of, a the particular export consignment has 
certain person or to the bearer of the been negotiated (i.e., presented to the 
instrument. It can be of two types: importer for payment) and the payment 
document against sight (sight draft) has been received in accordance with 
or document against acceptance the exchange control regulations.
(usance draft). In case of sight draft, 
the documents are handed over to the 11.3.2 Import Procedure 
importer only against payment. The 
moment the importer agrees to sign the Import trade refers to purchase of 
sight draft, the relevant documents are goods from a foreign country. Import 
delivered. In the case of usance draft, procedure differs from country to 
on the other hand, the documents are country depending upon the country’s 
delivered to the importer against his or import and custom policies and other 
her acceptance of the bill of exchange statutory requirements. The following 
for making payment at the end of a paragraphs discuss various steps 
specified	period,	say	three	months. involved in a typical import transaction 

On receiving the bill of exchange, for bringing goods into Indian territory.
the importer releases the payment (i) Trade enquiry: The first thing 
in case of sight draft or accepts the that the importing firm has to do 
usance draft for making payment on is to gather information about the 
maturity of the bill of exchange. The countries and firms which export 
exporter’s bank receives the payment the given product. The importer can 
through the importer’s bank and is gather such information from the trade 
credited to the exporter’s account. directories and/or trade associations 

The exporter, however, need not and	 organisations.	Having	 identified	
wait for the payment till the release of the	 countries	 and	 firms	 that	 export 
money by the importer. The exporter the product, the importing firm 
can get immediate payment from approaches	the	export	firms	with	the	
his/her bank on the submission help of a trade enquiry for collecting 
of documents by signing a letter of information about their export prices 
indemnity. By signing the letter, the and terms of exports. A trade enquiry 
exporter undertakes to indemnify the is a written request by an importing 
bank in the event of non-receipt of firm to the exporter for supply of 
payment from the importer along with information regarding the price and 
accrued interest. various terms and conditions on which 

Having received the payment for the latter is ready to exports goods. 
exports, the exporter needs to get a bank After receiving a trade enquiry, 
certificate	of	payment.	Bank	certificate	 the exporter prepares a quotation and 
of payment is a certificate which sends it to the importer. The quotation 

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   269 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



270 BUSINESS  STUDIES

is known as proforma invoice. A goods that he or she wants to import 
proforma invoice is a document that are subject to import licensing. In case 
contains details as to the quality, goods can be imported only against 
grade, design, size, weight and price the licence, the importer needs to 
of the export product, and the terms procure an import licence. In India, it 
and conditions on which their export is obligatory for every importer (and 
will take place. also for exporter) to get registered with 
(ii) Procurement of import licence: the Directorate General Foreign Trade 
There are certain goods that can be (DGFT) or Regional Import Export 
imported freely, while others need Licensing Authority, and obtain an 
licensing. The importer needs to Import Export Code (IEC) number. This 
consult the Export Import (EXIM) number is required to be mentioned on 
policy in force to know whether the most of the import documents. 

Major Documents needed in Connection with Export Transaction
A. Documents related to goods 
Export invoice: Export invoice is a sellers’ bill for merchandise and contains 
information about goods such as quantity, total value, number of packages, marks 
on packing, port of destination, name of ship, bill of lading number, terms of delivery 
and payments, etc. 
Packing list: A packing list is a statement of the number of cases or packs and the 
details of the goods contained in these packs. It gives details of the nature of goods 
which are being exported and the form in which these are being sent. 
Certificate of origin:	This	is	a	certificate	which	specifies	the	country	in	which	the	
goods	 are	 being	 produced.	 This	 certificate	 entitles	 the	 importer	 to	 claim	 tariff	
concessions or other exemptions such as non-applicability of quota restrictions 
on	goods	originating	from	certain	pre-specified	countries.		This	certificate	is	also	
required when there is a ban on imports of certain goods from select countries. 
The goods are allowed to be brought into the importing country if these are not 
originating from the banned countries. 
Certificate of inspection: For ensuring quality, the government has made it 
compulsory for certain products that these be inspected by some authorised agency. 
Export Inspection Council of India (EICI) is one such agency which carries out such 
inspections	and	issues	the	certificate	that	the	consignment	has	been	inspected	as	
required	under	the	Export	(Quality	Control	and	Inspection)	Act,	1963,	and	satisfies	
the conditions relating to quality control and inspection as applicable to it, and is 
export	worthy.	Some	countries	have	made	this	certificate	mandatory	for	the	goods	
being imported to their countries.

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   270 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 271

B. Documents related to shipment 
Mate’s receipt:	This	receipt	is	given	by	the	commanding	officer	of	the	ship	to	the	
exporter after the cargo is loaded on the ship. The mate’s receipt indicates the name 
of the vessel, berth, date of shipment, description of packages, marks and numbers, 
condition of the cargo at the time of receipt on board the ship, etc. The shipping 
company does not issue the bill of lading unless it receives the mate’s receipt.
Shipping Bill: The shipping bill is the main document on the basis of which customs 
office	grants	permission	for	the	export.	The	shipping	bill	contains	particulars	of	
the goods being exported, the name of the vessel, the port at which goods are to be 
discharged,	country	of	final	destination,	exporter’s	name	and	address,	etc.		
Bill of lading: Bill of lading is a document wherein a shipping company gives its 
official	receipt	of	the	goods	put	on	board	its	vessel	and	at	the	same	time	gives	an	
undertaking to carry them to the port of destination. It is also a document of title 
to the goods and as such is freely transferable by the endorsement and delivery. 
Airway Bill: Like a bill of lading, an airway bill is a document wherein an airline 
company	gives	its	official	receipt	of	the	goods	on	board	its	aircraft	and	at	the	same	
time gives an undertaking to carry them to the port of destination. It is also a 
document of title to the goods and as such is freely transferable by the endorsement 
and delivery. 
Marine insurance policy:	 It	 is	 a	 certificate	 of	 insurance	 contract	whereby	 the	
insurance company agrees in consideration of a payment called premium to 
indemnify the insured against loss incurred by the latter in respect of goods exposed 
to perils of the sea.
Cart ticket: A cart ticket is also known as a cart chit, vehicle or gate pass. It is 
prepared by the exporter and includes details of the export cargo in terms of the 
shipper’s name, number of packages, shipping bill number, port of destination and 
the number of the vehicle carrying the cargo.
C. Documents related to payment
Letter of credit: A letter of credit is a guarantee issued by the importer’s bank that 
it will honour up to a certain amount the payment of export bills to the bank of the 
exporter. Letter of credit is the most appropriate and secure method of payment 
adopted to settle international transactions
Bill of exchange: It is a written instrument whereby the person issuing the instrument 
directs	the	other	party	to	pay	a	specified	amount	to	a	certain	person	or	the	bearer	
of the instrument. In the context of an export-import transaction, bill of exchange 
is drawn by exporter on the importer asking the latter to pay a certain amount to 
a certain person or the bearer of the bill of exchange. The documents giving title 
to the export consignment are passed on to the importer only when the importer 
accepts the order contained in the bill of exchange.
Bank certificate of payment: Bank	certificate	of	payment	is	a	certificate	that	the	
necessary documents (including bill of exchange) relating to the particular export 
consignment has been negotiated (i.e., presented to the importer for payment) and 
the payment has been received in accordance with the exchange control regulations.

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   271 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



272 BUSINESS  STUDIES

(iii) Obtaining foreign exchange: importer and the overseas supplier 
Since the supplier in the context of is a letter of credit, then the importer 
an import transaction resides in a should obtain the letter of credit from 
foreign country, he/she demands its bank and forward it to the overseas 
payment in a foreign currency. supplier.  As stated previously, a letter 
Payment in foreign currency involves of credit is a guarantee issued by the 
exchange of Indian currency into importer’s bank that it will honour 
foreign currency. In India, all foreign payment up to a certain amount 
exchange transactions are regulated of export bills to the bank of the 
by the Exchange Control Department exporter. Letter of credit is the most 
of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). As appropriate and secured method of 
per the rules in force, every importer payment adopted to settle international 
is required to secure the sanction of transactions. The exporter wants this 
foreign exchange. For obtaining such document to be sure that there is no 
a sanction, the importer has to make risk of non-payment. 
an application to a bank authorised (vi) Arranging for finance: The 
by RBI to issue foreign exchange. The importer should make arrangements 
application is made in a prescribed in advance to pay to the exporter on 
form along with the import licence arrival of goods at the port. Advanced 
as per the provisions of Exchange planning for financing imports 
Control Act. After proper scrutiny of is necessary so as to avoid huge 
the application, the bank sanctions demurrages (i.e., penalties) on the 
the necessary foreign exchange for the imported goods lying uncleared at the 
import transaction. port for want of payments. 
(iv) Placing order or indent: After (vii) Receipt of shipment advice: 
obtaining the import licence, the After loading the goods on the vessel, 
importer places an import order or the overseas supplier dispatches the 
indent with the exporter for supply shipment advice to the importer. A 
of	the	specified	products.	The	import	 shipment advice contains information 
order contains information about the about the shipment of goods. The 
price, quantity size, grade and quality information provided in the shipment 
of goods ordered and the instructions advice includes details such as invoice 
relating to packing, shipping, ports number, bill of lading/airways bill 
of shipment and destination, delivery number and date, name of the vessel 
schedule, insurance and mode of with date, the port of export, description 
payment. The import order should be of goods and quantity, and the date of 
carefully drafted so as to avoid any sailing of vessel.
ambiguity and consequent conflict ( v i i i )  Ret i rement  o f  import 
between the importer and exporter. documents: Having shipped the 
(v) Obtaining letter of credit: If the goods, the overseas supplier prepares 
payment terms agreed between the a set of necessary documents as per 

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   272 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 273

the terms of contract and letter of manifest.  Import general manifest is a 
credit and hands it over to his or her document that contains the details of 
banker for their onward transmission the imported goods. It is a document 
and negotiation to the importer in the on the basis of which unloading of 
manner	 as	 specified	 in	 the	 letter	 of	 cargo takes place. 
credit. The set of documents normally (x) Customs clearance and release 
contains bill of exchange, commercial of goods: All the goods imported 
invoice, bill of lading/airway bill, into India have to pass through 
packing list, certificate of origin, customs clearance after they cross the 
marine insurance policy, etc. Indian borders.  Customs clearance 

The bill of exchange accompanying is a somewhat tedious process and 
the above documents is known as calls for completing a number of 
the documentary bill of exchange. As formalities.  It is, therefore, advised that 
mentioned earlier in connection with importers appoint C&F agents who are 
the export procedure, documentary well- versed with such formalities and 
bill of exchange can be of two types: play an important role in getting the 
documents against payment (sight goods customs cleared.
draft )  and documents against Firstly, the importer has to obtain 
acceptance (usance draft). In the case a delivery order which is otherwise 
of sight draft, the drawer instructs known as endorsement for delivery. 
the bank to hand over the relevant Generally when the ship arrives at 
documents to the importer only the port, the importer obtains the 
against payment. But in the case of endorsement on the back of the bill of 
usance draft, the drawer instructs lading. This endorsement is done by 
the bank to hand over the relevant the concerned shipping company. In 
documents to the importer against some cases instead of endorsing the 
acceptance of the bill of exchange. bill, the shipping company issues a 

delivery order. This order entitles the 
The acceptance of bill of exchange for importer to take the delivery of goods. 
the purpose of getting delivery of the Of	course,	the	importer	has	to	first	pay	
documents is known as retirement of the freight charges (if these have not 
import documents. Once the retirement been paid by the exporter) before he or 
is over, the bank hands over the import she can take possession of the goods.
documents to the importer. The importer has to also pay 
(ix) Arrival of goods: Goods are dock dues and obtain port trust dues 
shipped by the overseas supplier as receipt. For this, the importer has to 
per the contract. The person in charge submit to the ‘Landing and Shipping 
of the carrier (ship or airway) informs Dues	Office’	two	copies	of	a	duly	filled	
the	 officer	 in	 charge	 at	 the	 dock	 or	 in form — known as ‘application to 
the airport about the arrival of goods import’. The ‘Landing and Shipping 
in the importing country. He provides Dues	Office’	levies	a	charge	for	services	
the document called import general of dock authorities which has to be 

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   273 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



274 BUSINESS  STUDIES

borne by the importer. After payment After payment of the import duty, 
of dock charges, the importer is given the bill of entry has to be presented to 
back one copy of the application as a the dock superintendent. The same has 
receipt. This receipt is known as ‘port to be marked by the superintendent 
trust dues receipt’. and an examiner will be asked to 

The	 importer	 then	fills	 in	 a	 form	
‘bill of entry’ for assessment of customs physically examine the goods imported. 
import duty. One appraiser examines The examiner gives his report on the 
the document carefully and gives bill of entry. The importer or his agent 
the examination order. The importer presents the bill of entry to the port 
procures the said document prepared authority. After receiving necessary 
by the appraiser and pays the duty, charges, the port authority issues the 
if any. release order.

Major Documents used in an Import Transaction
Trade enquiry: A	trade	enquiry	 is	a	written	request	by	an	 importing	firm	to	 the	
exporter for supply of information regarding the price and various terms and 
conditions on which the latter exports goods. 
Proforma invoice: A proforma invoice is a document that contains details as to the 
quality, grade, design, size, weight and price of the export product, and the terms 
and conditions on which their export will take place. 
Import order or indent: It is a document in which the buyer (importer) orders for 
supply of requisite goods to the supplier (exporter). The order or indent contains 
the information such as quantity and quality of goods to be imported, price to be 
charged, method of forwarding the goods, nature of packing, mode of payment, etc.
Letter of credit: It is document that contains a guarantee from the importer bank to 
the exporter’s bank that it is undertaking to honour the payment up to a certain 
amount of the bills issued by the exporter for exports of the goods to the importer. 
Shipment advice: The shipment advice is a document that the exporter sends to 
the importer informing him that the shipment of goods has been made. Shipment 
of advice contains invoice number, bill of lading/airways bill number and date, 
name of the vessel with date, the port of export, description of goods and quantity, 
and the date of sailing of the vessel.
Bill of lading: It is a document prepared and signed by the master of the ship 
acknowledging the receipt of goods on board. It contains terms and conditions on 
which the goods are to be taken to the port of destination.
Airway Bill: Like a bill of lading, an airway bill is a document wherein an airline/ 
shipping	company	gives	its	official	receipt	of	the	goods	on	board	its	aircraft	and	
at the same time gives an undertaking to carry them to the port of destination. It 
is also a document of title to the goods and as such is freely transferable by the 
endorsement and delivery. 

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   274 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 275

Bill of entry:	Bill	of	entry	is	a	form	supplied	by	the	customs	office	to	the	importer.	
It	is	to	be	filled	in	by	the	importer	at	the	time	of	receiving	the	goods.	It	has	to	be	
in	triplicate	and	is	to	be	submitted	to	the	customs	office.	The	bill	of	entry	contains	
information such as name and address of the importer, name of the ship, number of 
packages, marks on the package, description of goods, quantity and value of goods, 
name and address of the exporter, port of destination, and customs duty payable.
Bill of exchange: It is a written instrument whereby the person issuing the instrument 
directs	the	other	party	to	pay	a	specified	amount	to	a	certain	person	or	the	bearer	
of the instrument. In the context of an export-import transaction, bill of exchange 
is drawn by the exporter on the importer asking the latter to pay a certain amount 
to a certain person or the bearer of the bill of exchange. The documents giving title 
to the export consignment are passed on to the importer only when the importer 
accepts the order contained in the bill of exchange.
Sight draft: It is a type of bill of exchange wherein the drawer of the bill of exchange 
instructs the bank to hand over the relevant documents to the importer only against 
payment. 
Usance draft: It is a type of bill of exchange wherein the drawer of the bill of exchange 
instructs the bank to hand over the relevant documents to the importer only against 
acceptance of the bill of exchange.
Import general manifest:  Import general manifest is a document that contains the 
details of the imported good. It is the document on the basis of which unloading 
of cargo takes place. 
Dock challan: Dock charges are to be paid when all the formalities of the customs are 
completed.	While	paying	the	dock	dues,	the	importer	or	his	clearing	agent	specifies	
the amount of dock dues in a challan or form which is known as dock challan.

Key Terms
International Contract IEC number Certificate	of	origin
business manufacturing Registration- Customs clearance
International trade Licensing cum membership Letter of credit
Merchandise trade Franchising certificate Shipping bill
Invisible trade Outsourcing Pre-shipment Mate receipt
Foreign investment Joint ventures finance Bill of lading
FDI Wholly owned Pre-shipment Airway bill
Portfolio subsidiaries inspection Invoice
investment Proforma invoice Export inspection Bill of exchange
Exproting Order or intent agency Sight draft
Importing Export licence Excise clearance Usance draft

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   275 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



276 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Negotiation of bills Delivery order Export Promotion Commodity 
Marine insurance Bill of entry Capital Goods Scheme boards
policy C&F agent (EPCG) IIFT
Cart ticket Port trust dues Export	finance Indian Institute 
Bank	certificate	of	 receipt Post-shipment	finance of Packaging
payment Duty drawback Export processing zone ITPO
Certificate	of	 scheme (EPZ) Export 
inspection Export 100% Export Oriented Inspection 
Trade enquiry manufacturing Unit (100% EOU) Council 
Shipment advice under bond scheme Department of Commerce State trading 
Import general Advance licence Export promotion organisations
manifest scheme council 

SUMMARY
International Business: International business refers to business activities 
that take place across national frontiers. Though many people use the terms 
international business and international trade synonymously, the former is a 
much broader term. International business involves not only trade in goods 
and services, but also other operations, such as production and marketing of 
goods and services in foreign countries.
International Vs Domestic Business: Conducting and managing international 
business operations is more complex than undertaking domestic business. 
Differences in the nationality of parties involved, relatively less mobility of 
factors of production, customer heterogeneity across markets, variations in 
business practices and political systems, varied business regulations and 
policies, and use of different currencies are the key aspects that differentiate 
international businesses from domestic business. These, moreover, are the 
factors	that	make	international	business	much	more	complex	and	a	difficult	
activity.

EXERCISES

Short Answer Questions
1. Differentiate between international trade and international business.
2. Discuss any three advantages of international business.
3. What is the major reason underlying trade between nations?
4. Differentiate between contract manufacturing and setting up wholly owned 

production subsidiary abroad.

2024-25

Chapter 11.indd   276 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 277

5. Why is it necessary for an export firm to go in for pre-shipment inspection?
6. What is bill of lading? How does it differ from bill of entry?
7. What is a letter of credit? Why does an exporter need this document?
8. Discuss the process involved in securing payment for exports.

Long Answer Questions
1. “International business is more than international trade”. Comment.
2. What benefits do firms derive by entering into international business?
3. In what ways is exporting a better way of entering international markets 

than setting up wholly owned subsidiaries abroad.
4. Rekha Garments has received an order to export 2000 men’s trousers to 

Swift Imports Ltd., located in Australia. Discuss the procedure that Rekha 
Garments would need to go through for executing the export order.

5. Your firm is planning to import textile machinery from Canada. Describe 
the procedure involved in importing.

6. What is IMF? Discuss its various objectives and functions.
7. Write a detailed note on features, structure, objectives and functioning  

of WTO.

2024-25



278 BUSINESS  STUDIES

FORM NO. INC-1
(Pursuant to section 4(4) of the Companies Application for
Act, 2013 and pursuant to rule 8 & 9 of reservation of Name
the Companies
(Incorporation) Rules, 2014)

Form language   English Hindi
Refer the instruction kit for filing the form.

1.* Application for :
  Incorporating a new company (Part A, B, C)
  Changing the name of an existing company (Part B, C, D)
Part A: Reservation of name for incorporation of a new company
2. Details of applicant (In case the applicant has been allotted DIN, then it is mandatory to 
 enter such DIN)
 (a) Director identification number (DIN) or Income tax      Pre-fill
 permanent account number (PAN) or passport number        Verify Details
 (b) *First Name 
   Middle Name 
  *Surname 
 (c) *Occupation Type  Self-employed  Professional  Homemaker  Student  
    Serviceman
 (d) Address             *LINE I 
               LINE II 
 (e) *City  
 (f) *State/Union Territory 
 (g) *Pin Code  
 (h) ISO Country code 
 (i) Country  
 (j) e-mail ID  
 (k) Phone (with STD/ISD code)  —  
 (l) Mobile (with country code)  —  
 (m) Fax   —  
3. (a) *Type of company
    Section 8 company   Part I company (Chapter XXI)   Producer company
    New company (others)
 (d) *State the sub-category of proposed company
    Public     Private    Private (One Person Company)
 (b) *State class of the proposed company 
 (c) *State the category of proposed company 
4. *Name of the State/Union territory in which the proposed company is to be registered
 

2024-25



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 279

5. *Name of the office of the Registrar of Companies in which the proposed company is to be 
 registered
 
6. Details of promoter(s) (In case the promoter(s) has been allotted DIN, then it is mandatory to 
 enter such DIN)
 * Enter the number of promoter(s) 

 *Category 
 DIN or Income-tax PAN or passport number or corporate 
 identification number (CIN) or foreign company registration    Pre-fill 
 Number (FCRN) or any other registration number
 *Name

 

7. *Objects of the proposed Company to be included in its MoA

 
8. *Particulars of proposed director(s)
 (Specify information of one director in case the proposed company is One Person Company or 
 of two directors in case the proposed company is a private company (other than producer 
 company) or of three directors in case the proposed company is a public company or of five 
 directors in case the proposed company is a producer company) 

*Director Identification Number (DIN)    Pre-fill
Name

Father’s Name

Nationality   Date of birth (DD/MM/YY) 
Income tax permanent account number (PAN) 
Passport number    Voter identity card number 
Aadhaar number    
Present residential address

9 *Whether the Promoters are carrying on any Partnership firm, sole proprietary or unregistered 
 entity in the name as applied for
    Yes    No
 (If yes, attach NOC from all owners/partners of such entity for use of such name)
Part B. Particulars about the proposed name(s)
10. *Number of proposed names for the company
 (Please give maximum six names in order of preference)

2024-25



280 BUSINESS  STUDIES

 I. Proposed name
 Significance of key or coined word in the
 proposed name
 State the name of the vernacular
 language(s) if used in the proposed name
11. *Whether the proposed name is in resemblance with any class of Trade Marks 
 Rules, 2002
    Yes    No
 If yes, Please specify the Class(s) of trade mark  
12. *Whether the proposed name(s) is/are based on a registered trade mark or is 
 subject matter  of an application pending for registration under the Trade Marks Act.
    Yes    No
 If yes, furnish particulars of trade mark or application and the approval of the applicant or 
 owner of the trademark

 
13. In case the name is similar to any existing company or to the foreign holding company, 
 specify name of such company and also attach copy of the No Objection Certificate by way of 
 board resolution (Duly attested by a director of that company)
 (a) Whether the name is similar to holding Company
    Existing Company   Foreign holding company 
 (b) In case of existing Company, provide CIN  Pre-fill
 (c) Name of the Company
 

14. (a) Whether the proposed name includes the words such as Insurance, Bank, Stock exchange, 
 Venture Capital, Asset Management, Nidhi, or Mutual Fund etc.   Yes   No
 If Yes, whether the in-principle approval is received from   
 specify other        Yes   No
 (If yes, attach the approval or if No, attach the approval at the time of filing the incorporation form
 (b) *Whether the proposed name including the phrase ‘Electoral trust’   Yes   No 
 [If Yes, attach the affidavit as per rule 8(2)(b)(vi)]
Part C. Names requiring Central Government approval
15. *State whether the proposed name(s) contain such word or expression for which the previous 
 approval of Central Government is required     Yes   No
 (If Yes, this form shall be treated as an application to the Central Govt., for such approval   
and shall be dealt with accordingly)
Part D. Reservation of name for change of Name by an Existing Company
16. (a) *CIN of Company     Pre-fill
 (b) Global Location Number (GLN) of Company 
17. (a) Name of Company  
 (b) Address of the registered office of the Company

 
 (c) Email ID of the Company 
18. (a) * State whether the change of name is due to direction received from the Central 
  Government.
    Yes   No
 (If yes, please attach a copy of such directions)

2024-25



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 281

 (b) * Whether the proposed name is in accordance with the rule 8(8) and specific direction 
  of the Tribunal is attached.
    Yes   No
 [If ‘Yes’ selected,attach order of tribunal as required in Rule 8(8)]
19. (a) Whether the change in name requires change in object of the company
    Yes   No
 (b) Reasons for change in name (in case of yes above, mention proposed object of the company)

 
Attachments
(12) Optional attachment, if any.  Attach   List of attachments

        
         Remove attachment

Declaration

 *I have gone through the provisions of The Companies Act, 2013, the rules thereunder and prescribed 
guidelines framed thereunder in respect of reservation of name, understood the meaning thereof and 
the proposed name(s) is/are in conformity thereof.
 *I have used the search facilities available on the portal of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA) 
for checking the resemblance of the proposed name(s) with the companies and Limited Liability 
partnerships (LLPs) respectively already registered or the names already approved. I have also used 
the search facility for checking the resemblances of the proposed name(s) with registered trademarks 
and trade mark subject of an application under The Trade Marks Act, 1999 and other relevant search 
for checking the resemblance of the proposed name(s) to satisfy myself with the compliance of the 
provisions of the Act for resemblance of name and Rules thereof.
 *The proposed name(s) is/are not in violation of the provisions of Emblems and Names (Prevention 
of Improper Use) Act, 1950 as amended from time to time.
 *The proposed name is not offensive to any section of people, e.g., proposed name does not contain 
profanity or words or phrases that are generally considered a slur against an ethnic group, religion, 
gender or heredity.
 *The proposed name(s) is not such that its use by the company will constitute an offence under any 
law for the time being in force.
 *To the best of my knowledge and belief, the information given in this application and its attachments 
thereto is correct and complete, and nothing relevant to this form has been suppressed.
 *I undertake to be fully responsible for the consequences in case the name is subsequently found 
to be in contravention of the provisions of section 4(2) and section 4(4) of the Companies Act, 2013 
and rules thereto and I have also gone through and understood the provisions of section 4(5) (ii) (a) 
and (b) of the Companies Act, 2013 and rules thereunder and fully declare myself responsible for 
the consequences thereof.

To be digitally signed by

*Designation    
*DIN or Income-tax PAN or passport number of the applicant or Director  
identification number of the director; or PAN of the manager or CEO or CFO; or Membership number 
of the Company Secretary
Note: Attention is drawn to the provisions of Section 7(5) and 7(6) which, inter-alia, provides 
that furnishing of any false or incorrect particulars of any information or suppression of any 
material information shall attract punishment for fraud under Section 447. Attention is also 
drawn to provisions of Section 448 and 449 which provide for punishment for false statement 
and punishment for false evidence respectively. 
 Modify Check Form  Prescrutiny  Submit

2024-25



NOTES

2024-25