Chapter 10

Internal trade

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

After studying this chapter, you should be able to:

•	 describe the meaning and types of internal trade;

•	 specify the services of wholesalers to manufactures and retailers;

•	 explain the services of retailers;

•	 classify the types of retailers;

•	 explain the forms of small scale and large scale retailers; and

•	 state the role of Chambers of Commerce and industry in the promotion 
of internal trade.

•	 officiate	the	implementation	of	GST

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   215 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



216 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Have	 you	 ever	 thought	 if	 there	 were	 no	markets,	 how	 products	 of	 different	
manufacturers would reach us? We are all aware of our general provisions store 
round the corner which is selling items of our daily need. But is that enough? When 
we	need	to	buy	items	of	a	specialised	nature,	we	like	to	look	at	bigger	markets	or	
shops with variety. Our observation tells us that there are different types of shops 
selling different items or specialised goods and depending on our requirements 
we	purchase	from	certain	shops	or	markets.	In	rural	areas,	we	may	have	noticed	
people selling their goods on the streets, these goods may range from vegetables to 
clothes.	This	is	a	completely	different	scene	from	what	we	see	in	the	urban	areas.	In	
our	country,	all	kinds	of	markets	co-exist	in	harmony.	With	the	advent	of	imported	
goods and multinational corporations, we have shops selling these products too. 
In big towns and cities, there are many retail shops selling particular branded 
products only. Another aspect of all this is, how these products reach the shops 
from	the	manufacturers?	There	must	be	some	middlemen	doing	this	job.	Are	they	
really useful or do prices increase because of them?

10.1  IntroductIon countries, on the other hand, is called 
Trade	refers	to	buying	and	selling	of	 external	 trade.	 The	 present	 chapter	
goods and services with the objective discusses in detail the meaning and 
of	 earning	profit.	Mankind	has	been	 nature of internal trade and explains 
engaged in trading, in some form or the its different types and the role of 
other, since early days of civilisation. chambers of commerce in promoting 
The	 importance	 of	 trade	 in	modern	 internal trade.
times has increased as new products 
are being developed every day and are 10.2 Internal trade

being made available for consumption Buying and selling of goods and services 
throughout the world. No individual or within the boundaries of a nation are 
country	can	claim	to	be	self-sufficient	 referred to as internal trade. Whether 
in producing all the goods and services the products are purchased from a 
required	 by	 it.	 Thus,	 each	 one	 is	 neighbourhood shop in a locality or a 
engaged in producing what it is best central	market	or	a	departmental	store	
suited to produce and exchanging the or a mall or even from any door-to-door 
excess produce with others. salesperson or from an exhibition, all 

On the basis of geographical these are examples of internal trade 
location of buyers and sellers, trade as the goods are purchased from an 
can broadly be classified into two individual or establishment within a 
categories (i) Internal trade; and (ii) country. No custom duty or import 
External	 trade.	 Trade	 which	 takes	 duty is levied on such trade as goods 
place within a country is called internal are part of domestic production and 
trade.	 Trade	 between	 two	 or	more	 are meant for domestic consumption. 

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   216 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



INTERNAL TRADE 217

Generally,	payment	has	to	be	made	in	 10.3 Wholesale trade
the legal tender of the country or any As discussed in the previous section, 
other acceptable currency. wholesale trade refers to buying and 

Internal	trade	can	be	classified	into	 selling of goods and services in large 
two broad categories viz., (i) wholesale quantities for the purpose of resale or 
trade	and	(ii)	retail	trade.	Generally,	for	 intermediate use.
products, which are to be distributed Wholesaling is concerned with 
to a large number of buyers who the activities of those persons or 
are located over a wide geographical es tab l i shments  which se l l  to 
area,	it	becomes	very	difficult	for	the	 retailers and other merchants, and/

or to industrial, institutional and 
producers to reach all the consumers commercial users but who do not 
or users directly. For example, if sell	in	significant	amount	to	ultimate	
vegetable oil or bathing soap or salt consumers. Wholesalers serve as an 
produced in a factory in any part of important	link	between	manufacturers	
the country are to reach millions of and	 retailers.	 They	 enable	 the	
consumers throughout the country, producers not only to reach large 
the help of wholesalers and retailers number of buyers spread over a wide 
becomes very important. Purchase geographical area (through retailers), 

but also  to perform a variety of 
and sale of goods and services in large functions in the process of distribution 
quantities for the purpose of resale of	goods	and	services.	They	generally	
or intermediate use is referred to as take	 the	 title	 of	 the	 goods	 and	 bear	
wholesale trade. the	business	risks	by	purchasing	and	

On the other hand, purchase selling the goods in their own name. 
and sale of goods in relatively small They	purchase	in	bulk	and	sell	in	small	
quantities, generally to the ultimate lots to retailers or industrial users. 
consumers, is referred to as retail They	undertake	various	activities	such	

as	grading	of	products,	packing	 into	
trade.	 Traders	 dealing	 in	wholesale	 smaller lots, storage, transportation, 
trade are called wholesale traders promotion of goods, collection of 
and those dealing in retail trade are market	information,	collection	of	small	
called retailers. Both retailers and and scattered orders of retailers and 
wholesalers	are	important	marketing	 distribution	of	supplies	to	them.	They	
intermediaries who perform very useful also relieve the retailers of maintaining 
functions in the process of exchange of large	stock	of	articles	and	extend	credit	
goods and services  between producers facilities	to	them.	Most	of	the	functions	

performed by wholesalers are such 
and users or ultimate consumers. which cannot be eliminated. If there 
Internal trade aims at equitable are no wholesalers, these functions 
distribution of goods within a nation shall have to be performed either by 
speedily and at reasonable cost. the manufacturers or the retailers.

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   217 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



218 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Services of Wholesalers purchased	by	them.	To	that	extent,	the	
Wholesalers provide various services manufacturers	 need	 not	 block	 their	
to manufacturers as well as retailers capital	in	the	stocks.	Sometimes	they	
and provide immense help in the also advance money to the producers 
distribution of goods and services. for	bulk	orders	placed	by	them.

(iv) Expert advice: As the wholesalers 
By	making	the	products	available	at	 are in direct contact with the retailers, 
a place where these are needed and they are in a position to advice the 
at a time when these are needed for manufacturers about various aspects 
consumption or use, they provide both including customer’s tastes and 
the	time	and	place	utility.	The	various	 preferences,	 market	 conditions,	
services of wholesalers to different competitive activities and the features 
sections are discussed below: preferred	 by	 the	 buyers.	 They	 serve	
10.3.1 Services to Manufacturers as	 an	 important	 source	 of	market	

information on these and related 
Major	services	offered	by	wholesalers	 aspects.
to the producers of goods and services (v) Help in marketing function: 
are given as below: The	 wholesalers	 take	 care	 of	 the	
(i) Facilitating large scale production: distribution of goods to a number of 
Wholesalers collect small orders retailers who, in turn, sell these goods 
from a number of retailers and pass to a large number of customers spread 
on the pool of such orders to the over	 a	 large	 geographical	 area.	 This	
manufacturers	 and	make	 purchases	 relieves the manufacturers from many 
in	 bulk	 quantities.	 This	 enables	 the	 of	the	marketing	activities	and	enable	
producers	to	undertake	production	on	 them to concentrate on the production 
a	large	scale	and	take	advantage	of	the	 activity.
economies of scale. (vi) Facilitate production continuity: 
(ii) Bearing risk:	 The	 wholesale	 The	wholesalers	facilitate	continuity	of	
merchants deal in goods in their own production activity throughout the 
name,	take	delivery	of	the	goods	and	 year by purchasing the goods as and 
keep	the	goods	purchased	in	large	lots	 when these are produced and storing 
in their warehouses. In the process, them till the time these are demanded 
they	bear	variety	of	risks	such	as	the	 by retailers or consumers in the 
risk	of	 fall	 in	prices,	 theft,	 pilferage,	 market.
spoilage,	fire,	etc.	To	that	extent,	they	 (vii) Storage: 	 Wholesalers	 take	
relieve the manufacturers from bearing delivery of goods when these are 
these	risks. produced	 in	 factory	 and	 keep	 them	
(iii) Financial assistance: 	 The	 in	 their	 godowns/warehouses.	 This	
wholesa lers  prov ide  f inanc ia l reduces the burden of manufacturers 
assistance to the manufacturers of providing for storage facilities for the 
in the sense that they generally finished	products.	They	thus	provide	
make	 cash	 payment	 for	 the	 goods	 time utility. 

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   218 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



INTERNAL TRADE 219

10.3.2 Services to Retailers (v) Risk sharing:	 The	 wholesalers	
The	 important	 services	 offered	 by	 purchase	in	bulk	and	sell	in	relatively	
manufacturers to the retailers are small quantities to the retailers. Being 
described as below: able to purchase merchandise in 
(i) Availability of goods: Retailers smaller quantities, retailers are in a 
have	 to	 maintain	 adequate	 stock	 position	 to	avoid	 the	risk	of	storage,	
of varied commodities so that they pilferage, obsolescence, reduction in 
can offer variety to their customers. prices and demand fluctuations in 
The	wholesalers	make	 the	 products	 respect of larger quantites of goods 
of various manufacturers readily that they would have to purchase in 
available	to	the	retailers.	This	relieves	 case the services of wholesalers are 
the	retailers	of	the	work	of	collecting	 not available.
goods from several producers and 
keeping	big	inventory	of	the	same. 10.4 retaIl trade

(ii) Marketing support:	 The	whole- A retailer is a business enterprise 
salers	 perform	 various	 marketing	 that is engaged in the sale of goods 
functions and provide support to the and services directly to the ultimate 
retailers.	They	undertake	advertising	 consumers.	The	retailer	normally	buys	
and other sales promotional activities goods in large quantities from the 
to induce customers to purchase the wholesalers and sells them in small 
goods.	The	retailers	are	benefitted	as	it	 quantities to the ultimate consumers. 
helps them in increasing the demand The	retails	represents	the	final		stage	
for various new products. in the distribution where goods are 
(iii) Grant of credit:	The	wholesalers	 transferred from the hands of the 
generally extend credit facilities to manufacturers or wholesalers to the 
their	regular	customers.	This	enables	 final	consumers	or	users.	Retailing	is,	
the retailers to manage their business thus, that branch of business which 
with	relatively	small	amount	of	working	 is devoted to the sale of goods and 
capital. services to the ultimate consumers for 
(iv) Specialised knowledge:	 The	 their personal and non-business use. 
wholesalers specialise in one line of There	may	 be	 different	 ways	 of	
products	 and	know	 the	pulse	 of	 the	 selling the goods viz., personally, 
market.	 They	 pass	 on	 the	 benefit	 of	 on telephone, or through vending 
their	 specialised	 knowledge	 to	 the	 machines. Also, the products may be 
retailers.	 They	 inform	 the	 retailers	 sold at different places, viz., in a store, 
about the new products, their uses, at the customer’s house or any other 
quality,	 prices,	 etc.	 They	may	 also	 place.	Some	of	the	common	situations	
advise them on the decor of the retail that we encounter in our daily life, 
outlet, allocation of shelf space and for example, are the sale of ball pens 
demonstration of certain products. or	 some	magic	medicine	 or	 book	 of	

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   219 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



220 BUSINESS  STUDIES

jokes	 in	 the	 roadways	 buses;	 the	 (i) Help in distribution of goods: A 
sale of cosmetics/detergent powder, retailer’s most important service to the 
on door-to-door sales basis; and the wholesalers and manufacturers is to 
sale of vegetables by the road side provide help in the distribution of their 
by a small farmer. But as long as the products	 by	making	 these	 available	
goods are sold to ultimate consumers, to	 the	final	 consumers,	who	may	be	
these will be treated as cases of retail scattered over a large geographic area. 
selling.	Thus,	irrespective	of	‘how’	the	 They	thus	provide	place	utility.
products	are	sold	or	‘where’	the	sale	is	 (ii) Personal selling: In the process 
made, if the sales are made directly to of sale of most consumer goods, some 
the consumers, it will be considered amount of personal selling effort is 
as retailing.

A retailer performs different necessary.	By	undertaking	 personal	
functions in the distribution of goods selling efforts, the retailers relieve the 
and services. He/she purchases a producers of this activity and greatly 
variety of products from the wholesale help them in the process of actualising 
distributors and others, arranges for the sale of the products.
proper storage of goods, sells the goods (iii) Enabling large-scale operations: 
in small quantities, bears  business On account of retailer’s services, the 
risks,	 grades	 the	 products,	 collects	 manufacturers and wholesalers are 
market	 information,	 extends	 credit	 to	 freed	 from	 the	 trouble	 of	 making	
the buyers and promotes the sale of individual sales to consumers in 
products through displays, participation small	 quantities.	 This	 enables	 them	
in various schemes, etc. to operate on, at relatively large scale, 

and thereby fully concentrate on their 
Services of Retailers other activities.
Retailers	 serve	 as	 an	 important	 link	 (iv) Collecting market information: 
between the producers and final As retailers remain in direct and 
consumers in the distribution of constant touch with the buyers, 
products	 and	 services.	 They	 provide	 they serve as an important source of 
useful services to the consumers, collecting	market	 information	 about	
wholesalers	and	manufacturers.	Some	 the tastes, preferences and attitudes 
of the important services of retailers of	 customers.	 Such	 information	 is	
are described as below: considered	 very	 useful	 in	 taking	

important	marketing	decisions	 in	an	
10.4.1 Services to Manufacturers organisation.

and Wholesalers (v)  Help in promotion:  From 
The	 invaluable	 services	 that	 the time-to-time, manufacturers and 
retailers render to the wholesalers and distributors have to carry on various 
producers are given as here under: promotional activities in order to 

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   220 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



INTERNAL TRADE 221

increase the sale of their products. selling efforts, retailers provide 
For example, they have to advertise important information about the 
their products and offer short-term arrival, special features, etc., of new 
incentives in the form of coupons, products	 to	 the	 customers.	 This	
free gifts, sales contests, and so on. serves as an important factor in the 
Retailers participate in these activities buying	decision	making	process	of	the	
in various ways and, thereby, help in purchase of such goods.
promoting the sale of the products.

(iii) Convenience in buying: Retailers 
10.4.2 Services to Consumers generally buy goods in large quantities 
Some	 of	 the	 important	 services	 of	 and sell these in small quantities, 
retailers from the point of view of according to the requirements of their 
consumers are as follows : customers. Also, they are normally 

situated very near to the residential 
(i) Regular availability of products: areas and remain open for long hours. 
The	 most	 important	 service	 of	 a	 This	 offers	 great	 convenience	 to	 the	
retailer to consumers is to maintain customers in buying products of their 
regular availability of various products requirements.
produced by different manufacturers. 
This	enables	the	buyers	to	buy	products	 (iv) Wide selection: Retailers generally 
as and when needed. keep	stock	of	a	variety	of	products	of	
(ii) New products information: different	manufacturers.	This	enables	
By arranging for effective display of the	 consumers	 to	make	 their	 choice	
products and through their personal out of a wide selection of goods.

Terms of Trade
The	following	are	the	main	terms	used	in	the	trade
 1. Cash on delivery (COD):- It refers to a type of transaction in which payment 

for goods or services is made at the time of delivery. If the buyer is unable 
to	make	payment	when	the	goods	or	services	are	delivered	then	it	will	be	
returned to the seller.

 2. Free on Board or Free on Rail (FoB or FOR):- It rerers to a contract between 
the seller and the buyer in which all the expenses up to the point of delivery 
to a carrier (it may be a ship, rail, lorry, etc.) are to be borne by seller.

 3. Cost, Insurance and Freight (CFF):- It is the price of goods which includes 
not only the cost of goods but also the insurance and frieght charges payable 
on goods upto destination port.

 4. Errors and Omissions Excepted(E&OE):- It refers to that term which is used 
in	trade	documents	to	say	that	mistakes	and	things	that	have	been	forgotten	
should	be	taken	into	account.

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   221 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



222 BUSINESS  STUDIES

(v) After-sales services: Retailers 10.5.1 Itinerant Retailers
provide important after-sales services 
in the form of home delivery, supply Itinerant retailers are traders who do 
of spare parts and attending to not	have	a	fixed	place	of	business	to	
customers.	This	becomes	an	important	 operate	 from.	 They	 keep	 on	moving	
factor in the buyers’ decision for repeat with their wares from street to street or 
purchase of the products. place to place, in search of customers. 

(vi) Provide credit facilities:	 The	 Characteristics
retailers sometimes provide credit 
facilities	to	their	regular	buyers.	This	 	 (a)	 They	are	small	traders	operating	
enables the latter to increase their level with limited resources.
of consumption and, thereby, their 	 (b)	 They	normally	deal	in	consumer	
standard of living. products of daily use such as 

toiletry products, fruits and 
10.5 types of retaIlIng trade vegetables, and so on.
There	 are	many	 types	 of	 retailers	 in	 	 (c)	 The	emphasis	of	such	traders	is	
India. For proper understanding, it on providing greater customer 
would be useful, to classify them into service	 by	making	 the	 products	
certain common categories. Different available at the very doorstep of 
classifications have been used by the customers.
experts to categorise retailers into 	 (d)	 As	 they	 do	 not	 have	 any	 fixed	
different types. For example, on the business establishment to operate 
basis	 of	 ‘size	 of	 business’,	 they	may	 from, these retailers have to 
be categorised into large, medium and keep	 their	 limited	 inventory	 of	
small	retailers.	On	the	basis	of	‘type	of	 merchandise either at home or at 
ownership’, they may be categorised some other place.
into	 ‘sole	 trader’,	 ‘partnership	 firm’,	 Some	of	 the	most	 common	 types	
‘cooperative	 store’	 and	 ‘company’.	 of itinerant retailers operating in India 
Similarly,	on	the	basis	of		‘merchandise	 are as below:
handled’,	the	different	classifications	 (i) Peddlers and hawkers: Peddlers 
may	be	‘speciality	store’,	‘supermarket’	 and	hawkers	are	probably	amongst	the	
and	 ‘departmental	 store’.	 Another	 oldest	form	of	retailers	in	the	market	
common basis of classification is place who have not lost their utility 
whether	or	not	they	have	a	fixed	place	 even	during	the	modern	times.	They	
of business. On this basis, there are are small producers or petty traders 
two categories of retailers: who carry the products on a bicycle, a 

(a) Itinerant retailers, and hand	cart,	a	cycle-rickshaw	or	on	their	
(b) Fixed shop retailers heads, and move from place to place to 
Both these types of retailers have sell their merchandise at the doorstep 

been described in detail  in the sections of	the	customers.	They	generally	deal	
that follow here after. in non-standardised and low-value 

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   222 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



INTERNAL TRADE 223

products such as toys, vegetables and of a temporary nature in a business 
fruits,	 fabrics,	 carpets,	 snacks	 and	 locality.	They	keep	on	changing	their	
ice	creams,	etc.	They	are	also	 found	 business from one locality to another, 
in streets of residential areas, places depending upon the potentiality of the 
of exhibitions or meals, and outside area. However, the change of place 
schools,	during	a	lunch	break. is not as frequent as in the case of 

The	main	advantage	of	this	form	of	 hawkers	or	market	traders.	They	deal	
retailing is the provision of convenient in consumer items as well as services 
service to the consumers. However, such as repair of watches, shoes, 
one should be careful in dealing with buckets	etc.
them, as the products they deal in are 
not always reliable in terms of quality 10.5.2 Fixed Shop Retailers
and price. This	 is	 the	 most	 common	 type	 of	
(ii) Market traders:	Market	 traders	 retailing	 in	 the	market	 place.	 As	 is	
are the small retailers who open their evident from the name, these are 
shops at different places on fixed retail shops who maintain permanent 
days	or	dates,	such	as	every	Saturday	 establishment to sell their merchandise. 
or	 alternate	 Saturdays,	 and	 so	 on.	 They,	 therefore,	 do	 not	move	 from 
These	traders	may	be	dealing	in	one	 place to place to serve their customers. 
particular line of merchandise, say Some	 of	 the	 other	 characteristics	 of	
fabrics or ready-made garments, toys, such traders are:
or	 crockery,	 or	 alternatively,	 they	
may	be	general	merchants.	They	are	 Characteristics
mainly catering to lower-income group  (a) Compared with the itinerant 
of customers and deal in low-priced traders, normally they have 
consumer items of daily use. greater resources and operate on 
(iii) Street traders (pavement a relatively large scale. However, 
vendors): Street	 traders	 are	 the	 there are different size groups of 
small retailers who are commonly fixed	shop	 retailers,	 varying	 from	
found	 at	 places	where	 huge	 floating	 very small to very large.
population gathers, for example, near 	(b)	These	 retailers	may	 be	 dealing	
railway stations and bus stands, and in different products, including 
sell consumer items of common use, consumer durables as well as non-
such as stationery items, eatables, durables. 
ready-made garments, newspapers 	(c)	 This	 category	 of	 retailers	 has	
and	magazines.	They	are	different	from	 greater credibility in the minds 
market	traders	in	the	sense	that	they	 of customers, and they are in a 
do not change their place of business position to provide greater services 
so frequently. to the customers such as home 
(iv) Cheap jacks:	Cheap	jacks	are	petty	 delivery, guarantees, repairs, credit 
retailers who have independent shops facilities, availability of spares, etc.

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   223 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



224 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Types of products. For example, shops selling 
The	 fixed-shop	 retailers	 can	 be	 children’s garments, men’s wear, ladies 
classified	 into	 two	 distinct	 types	 on	 shoes, toys and gifts, school uniforms, 
the basis of the size of their operations. college	books	or	consumer	electronic	
These	are: goods,	 etc.	 These	 are	 some	 of	 the	

(a)	small	shop-keepers,	and commonly found stores of this type in 
(b) large retailers. the	marketplace.
The	 different	 types	 of	 retailers	 The	speciality	shops	are	generally	

falling under the above two broad located in a central place where a large 
heads are described as follows: number of customers can be attracted, 

and they provide a wide choice to the 
Fixed Shop Small Retailers customers in the selection of goods.

(iii) Street stall holders:	These	small	
(i) General stores:	 General	 stores	 vendors are commonly found at street 
are most commonly found in a local crossings	or	other	places	where	flow	of	
market	and	residential	areas.	As	the	 traffic	 is	heavy.	They	attract	floating	
name indicates, these shops carry customers and deal mainly in goods 
stock	of	a	variety	of	products	required	 of	cheap	variety	like	hosiery	products,	
to satisfy the day-to-day needs of toys,	cigarettes,	soft	drinks,	etc.	They	
the consumers residing in nearby get their supplies from local suppliers 
localities.	Such	stores	remain	open	for	 as	well	as	wholesalers.	The	total	area	
long hours at convenient timings and covered by a stall is very limited and, 
often provide credit facilities to some therefore, they handle goods on a very 
of their regular customers. small	scale.	Their	main	advantage	is	

The	 biggest	 advantage	 of	 such	 in providing convenient service to the 
stores is in terms of convenience to customers in buying some of the items 
the customers in buying products of of their needs.
daily use such as grocery items, soft (iv) Second-hand goods shop:	These	
drinks,	 toiletry	 products,	 stationery	 shops deal in second-hand or used 
and confectionery. As most of their goods,	like	books,	clothes,	automobiles,	
customers are residents of the furniture and other household goods. 
same locality, an important factor Generally	persons	with	modest	means	
contributing to their success is the purchase	goods	from	such	shops.	The	
image of the owner and the rapport he goods	are	sold	at	 lower	prices.	Such	
has established with them. shops	may	also	stock	rare	objects	of	
(ii) Speciality shops:	 This	 type	 of	 historical value and antique items 
retail store is, of late, becoming very which are sold at rather heavy prices 
popular, particularly in urban areas. to people who have special interest in 
Instead of selling a variety of products such antique goods.
of different types, these retail stores The	 shops,	 selling	 second-hand	
specialise	in	the	sale	of	a	specific	line	 goods may be located at street crossings 

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   224 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



INTERNAL TRADE 225

or in busy streets in the form of a stall Some	 of	 the	 important	 features 
having very little structure —a table of a departmental store are 
or a temporary platform to display as follows:
the	 books	 or	may	 have	 reasonably	  (a) A modern departmental store 
good infrastructure, as in the case of may provide all facilities such as 
those selling furniture or used cars or restaurant, travel and information 
scooters or motorcycles. bureau, telephone booth, rest-

rooms, etc. As such they try 
Fixed shop — Large stores to provide maximum service 
 1. Departmental stores to higher class of customers 
  A departmental store is a large for whom price is of secondary 

establishment offering a wide importance.
variety	of	products,	classified	into	 	 (b)	 These	stores	are	generally	located	
well-defined	departments,	aimed at a central place in the heart 
at satisfying practically every of a city, which caters to a large 
customer’s need under one roof. number of customers.
It has a number of departments,  (c) As the size of these stores is very 
each	one	confining	its	activities	to	 large, they are generally formed as 
one	kind	of	product.	For	example,	 a	 joint	stock	company	managed	
there may be separate departments by	a	board	of	directors.	There	is	
for toiletries, medicines, furniture, a managing director assisted by 
groceries, electronics, clothing a general manager and several 
and dress material within a store. department managers.
Thus,	they	satisfy	diverse	market	  (d) A departmental store combines 
segments with a wide variety both the functions of retailing 
of goods and services. It is not a s  we l l  a s  wa r ehous ing . 
uncommon for a department They	 purchase	 directly	 from	
store	 in	 the	 United	 States	 of	 manufacturers and operate 
America	 to	 carry	 ‘needle	 to	 an	 separate	 warehouses.	 That	
aeroplane’	or	‘all	shopping	under	 way they help in eliminating 
one	roof.’		Everything	from	‘a	pin	 undesirable middlemen between 
to an elephant’ is the spirit behind the producers and the customers.
a typical department store.  (e) They	have	centralised purchasing 
In India real departmental stores arrangements. All the purchases 
have not yet come in a big way in a department store are made 
in the retailing business. However, central ly  by the purchase 
some stores on this line in department of the store, whereas 
India	include	‘Akberally’	in	Mumbai sales are decentralised in different 
and	 ‘Spencers’	 in	 Chennai. departments.

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   225 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



226 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Advantages Limitations
The	major	 advantages	 of	 retailing	 However, there are certain limitations 
through departmental stores may be of	 this	 type	 of	 retailing.	 These	 are	
listed as follows: described as follows:
( i )  Att ract  large  number  o f (i) Lack of personal attention: 
customers: As these stores are usually Because of the large-scale operations, 
located at central places, they attract a it	is	very	difficult	to	provide	adequate	
large number of customers during the personal attention to the customers in 
best part of the day. these stores.
(ii) Convenience in buying: By (ii) High operating cost: As these 
offering large variety of goods under stores give more emphasis on providing 
one roof, the departmental stores services, their operating costs tend to 
provide great convenience to customers be	 on	 the	 higher	 side.	 These	 costs,	
in buying almost all goods of their in	turn,	make	the	prices	of	the	goods	
requirements at one place. As a result, high.	They	are,	therefore,	not	attractive	
customers do not have to run from to the lower income group of people.
one place to another to complete their (iii) High possibility of loss: As a 
shopping. result of high operating costs and 
(iii)  Attractive  services:   A large-scale operations, the chances 
departmental store aims at providing of incurring losses in a departmental 
maximum services to the customers. store are high. For example, if there is 

any change in the tastes of customers 
Some	 of	 the	 services	 offered	 by	 it	 or latest fashions, it necessitates 
include home delivery of goods, selling of such out-of-fashion articles 
execution of telephone orders, grant in clearance sale, to reduce the huge 
of credit facilities and provision for inventory of goods built up.
restrooms,  te lephone booths , (iv) Inconvenient location: As 
restaurants, saloons, etc. a departmental store is generally 
( iv )  Economy of  large -sca le situated at a central location, it is not 
operations: As these stores are convenient for the purchase of goods 
organised at a very large scale, the that are needed at short notice.
benefits of large scale operations, In spite of some of these limitations 
particularly, in respect of purchase of the departmental stores have been 
goods are available to them. popular in some of the western 
(v )  Promotion of  sa les : 	 The countries of the world because of 
departmental stores are in a position to their benefits to a certain class of 
spend considerable amount of money customers.
on advertising and other promotional  2. Chain Stores or Multiple Shops: 
activities, which help in boosting their Chain stores or multiple shops 
sales. are	networks	of	retail	shops	that 

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   226 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



Internal trade 227

are owned and operated by daily reports to the head office 
manufacturers or intermediaries. in respect of the sales, cash 
Under this type of arrangement, deposits, and the require-ments 
a number of shops with similar of the stock.
appearance are established in  (d) All the branches are controlled by 
localities, spread over different the head office, which is concerned 
parts of the country. These with formulating the policies and 
different shops normally deal getting them implemented.
in standardised and branded  (e) The prices of goods in such 
consumer products, which have shops are fixed and all sales 
rapid sales turnover. These shops are made on cash basis.  The 
are run by the same organisation cash realised from the sales of 
and have identical merchandising merchandise is deposited daily 

into a local bank account on 
strategies, with identical products behalf of the head office, and a 
and displays. Some of the report is sent to the head office 
important features of such shops in this regard.
may be described as follows:  (f) The head office normally appoints 

 (a) These shops are located in inspectors, who are concerned 
fairly populous localities, where with day-to-day supervision of 
sufficient number of customers the shops, in respect of quality 
can be approached.  The idea of customer service provided, 
is to serve the customers at a adherence to the policies of the 
point which is nearest to their head office, and so on.
residence or work place, rather The chain operation is most effective 
than attracting them to a central in handling high-volume merchandise, 
place. whose sales are relatively constant 

 (b) The manufacturing/procurement throughout the year. In India, Bata 
of merchandise for all the retail Shoe stores DCM, Nirula’s Raymonds 
units is centralised at the head etc., are typical examples of such 
office, from where the goods are shops.
despatched to each of these shops 
according to their requirements. Advantages
This results in savings in the cost Multiple shops are offering various 
of operation of these stores. advantages to the consumers, which 

 (c) Each retail shop is under the are described as follows:
direct supervision of a Branch (i) Economies of scale: As there is 
Manager, who is held responsible central procurement, the multiple-shop 
for its day-to-day management. organisation enjoys the economies of 
The Branch Manager sends scale.

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   227 18-04-2024   11:38:20



228 BUSINESS  STUDIES

(ii) Elimination of middlemen: By of other manufacturers. In that way 
selling directly to the consumers, the the consumers get only a limited choice 
multiple-shop organisation is able to of	goods.	This,	however	is	not	the	case	
eliminate unnecessary middlemen in with retailer owned chain stores such 
the sale of goods and services. as Big Apple or Reliance Retail which 
(iii) No bad debts:	Since	all	the	sales	 sell products of a large number of 
in these shops are made on cash basis, manufacturers.
there are no losses on account of bad (ii) Lack of initiative: The	personnel	
debts. managing the multiple shops have to 
(iv) Transfer of goods:	 The	 goods	 obey the instructions received from 
not in demand in a particular locality the	 head	 office.	 	 This	makes	 them	
may be transferred to another locality habitual	 of	 looking	 up	 to	 the	 head	
where	it	is	in	demand.		This	reduces	 office	for	guidance	on	all	matters,	and	
the	 chances	 of	 dead	 stock	 in	 these	 takes	away	the	initiative	from	them	to	
shops. use	their	creative	skills	to	satisfy	the	
(v) Diffusion of risk:	 The	 losses	 customers.
incurred by one shop may be covered (iii) Lack of personal touch: Lack	of	
by	profits	in	other	shops,	reducing	the	 initiative in the employees sometimes 
total	risk	of	an	organisation. leads	 to	 indifference	 and	 lack	 of	
(vi) Low cost: Because of centralised personal touch in them.
purchasing, elimination of middlemen, (iv) Difficult to change demand: 
centralised promotion of sales and If the demand for the merchandise 
increased sales, the multiple shops handled by multiple shops change 
have lower cost of business. rapidly, the management may have 
(vii) Flexibility: Under this system, to sustain huge losses because of 
if	a	shop	is	not	operating	at	a	profit,	 large	 stocks	 lying	 unsold	 at	 the 
the management may decide to close it central depot.
or shift it to some other place without 
really	affecting	the	profitability	of	the	 Difference between Departmental 
organisation as a whole. stores and Multiple shops

Limitations Although both these types of retail 
organisations are large establishments, 

(i) Limited selection of goods: there are certain differences between 
Some	of	the	multiple	shops	deal	only	 the	 two.	 Such	 differences	 are	 given	
in	 limited	 range	of	products.	This	 is	 here below:
especially the problem with the chain (i) Location: A departmental store 
stores which are owned and operated is located at a central place, where 
by manufacterers, and as such mostly a large number of customers can be 
sell the products produced by the attracted to it.  However, the multiple 
themselves.	They	do	not	sell	products	 stores are located at a number of 

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   228 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



INTERNAL TRADE 229

places for approaching a large number (vi) Credit facilities: All sales in the 
of	customers.		Thus,	central	location	 multiple shops are made strictly on cash 
is not necessary for a multiple shop. basis. In contrast, the departmental 
(ii) Range of products:  Departmental stores may provide credit facilities to 
stores aim at satisfying all the needs some of their regular customers.
of customers under one roof. As (vii) Flexibility: As the departmental 
such, they have to carry a variety of stores deal in a wide variety of products, 
products of different types. However, they	have	certain	flexibility	in	respect	
the multiple stores generally aim to of	the	line	of	goods	marketed.		However,	
satisfy the requirements of customers there	is	not	much	scope	for	flexibility	
relating	 to	 a	 specified	 range	 of	 their	 in the chain stores, which deal only in 
products only. limited line of products.
( i i i )  S e r v i c e s  o f f e r e d : 	 Th e	
departmental stores lay great emphasis Mail Order Houses
on providing maximum service to their 
customers.	 	 Some	 of	 the	 services,	 Mail	 order	 houses	 are	 the	 retail	
provided by them include alteration outlets that sell their merchandise 
of garments, restaurant and so on. through	mail.	 There	 is	 generally	 no	
As against this, the multiple shops direct personal contact between the 
provide	very	limited	service	confined	to	 buyers and the sellers in this type of 
guarantees and repairs if  the sold out trading. For obtaining orders, potential 
goods turn out to be defective. customers are approached through 
(iv) Pricing:	 The	 multiple	 shop	 advertisements in newspapers or 
chains	sell	goods	at	fixed	prices	and	 magazines, circulars, catalogues, 
maintain uniform pricing policies samples and bills, and price lists 
for	 all	 the	 shops.	 The	 departmental	 sent to them by post. All the relevant 
stores, however, do not have uniform information about the products 
pricing policy for all the departments; 
rather they have to occasionally offer such as the price, features, delivery 
discounts on certain products and terms, terms of payment, etc., are 
varieties	to	clear	their	stock. described in the advertisement. On 
(v) Class of customers:	The	depart- receiving the orders, the items are 
mental stores cater to the needs carefully scrutinised with respect to 
of relatively high income group of the	 specifications	 asked	 for	 by	 the	
customers who care more for the buyers and are complied with through 
services provided rather than the prices the	post	office.
of	 the	product.	 	The	multiple	shops,	 There	can	be	different	alternatives	
on the other hand, cater to different for receiving payments. First, the 
types of customers, including those customers	may	 be	 asked	 to	make	
belonging to the lower income groups, full	payment	in	advance.	Second,	the	
who are interested in buying quality goods may be sent by Value Payable 
goods at reasonable prices. Post (VPP). Under this arrangement, 

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   229 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



230 BUSINESS  STUDIES

the goods are sent through post and infrastructural	 facilities.	 Therefore,	
are delivered to the customers only it can be started with relatively low 
on	making	full	payment	for	the	same.	 amount of capital.
Third,	the	goods	may	be	sent	through	 (ii) Elimination of middle men: 
a	bank,	which	is	instructed	to	deliver	 The	 biggest	 advantage	 of	mail-order	
the articles to the customers. In this business from the point of view 
arrangement	 there	 is	 no	 risk	 of	 bad	 of consumers is that unnecessary 
debt, as the goods are handed over middlemen between the buyers and 
to	the	buyers	only	after	he	makes	full	 sellers	are	eliminated.	This	may	result	
payment. However, there is a need in lot of savings both to the buyers as 
to ensure the buyers that the goods well as to the sellers.
despatched are in accordance with (iii) Absence of bad debt:	Since	the	
their	specifications.	 mail order houses do not extend credit 

This	type	of	business	is	not	suitable	 facilities to the customers, there are 
for all types of products. For example, no chances of any bad debt on 
goods that are perishable in nature or account of non payment of cash by 
are	bulky	and	cannot	be	easily	handled,	 the customers.
are not recommended for mail-house (iv) Wide reach: Under this system 
trading. Only the goods that can be the goods can be sent to all the places 
(i) graded and standardised, (ii) easily having	postal	services.	This	opens	wide	
transported at low cost, (iii) have scope for business as a large number 
ready	demand	in	the	market,	(iv)	are	 of people throughout the country can 
available in large quantity throughout be served through mail.
the year, (v) involve least possible (v) Convenience: Under this system 
competition	 in	 the	market	 and	 (vi)	 goods are delivered at the doorstep of 
can be described through pictures the	 customers.	 This	 results	 in	 great	
etc., are suitable for this type of convenience to the customers in 
trading. Another important point in buying these products.
this regard is that mail house business 
cannot be successfully carried out Limitations
unless education is wide spread. (i) Lack of personal contact: As 
It is so because only the literate there is no personal contact between 
people can be reached through the buyers and the sellers under the 
advertisements and other forms of system of mail order selling, there 
written communication. are greater possibilities of mis-
Advantages understanding and mistrust between 

the	 two.	 The	 buyers	 are	 not	 in	 a	
(i) Limited capital requirement:	Mail	 position to examine the products 
order business does not require heavy before buying and the sellers cannot 
expenditure on building and other pay	personal	attention	to	the	likes	and	

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   230 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



INTERNAL TRADE 231

dislikes	of	the	buyers	and	cannot	clear	 without postal facilities, this type of 
all their doubts through catalogues business has limited prospects.
and advertisements.
(ii) High promotion cost:	 The	mail	 Consumer Cooperative Store
order business has to rely heavily on 
advertisements and other methods A consumer cooperative store is an 
of promotion in order to inform and organisation owned, managed and 
persuade the potential buyers to buy controlled by consumers themselves. 
their products. As a result, there is The	 objective	 of	 such	 stores	 is	 to	
heavy expenditure on promotion of reduce the number of middlemen 
the products. who increase the cost of produce, and 
(iii) No after sales service: In mail thereby provide service to the members. 
order selling, the buyers and sellers The	 cooperative	 stores	 generally 
may be located very far away from each buy in large quantity, directly from 
other and there is no personal contact manufacturers or wholesalers and sell 
between the two. As a result, there is them to the consumers at reasonable 
absence of after sales services which prices.	 Since	 the	 middleman	 are	
is so important for the satisfaction of eliminated or reduced, the members 
the customers. get products of good quality at cheaper 
(iv) No credit facilities: The	mail	order	 rates.	The	profits	earned	by	consumer	
houses do not provide credit facilities cooperative stores during a year 
to	the	buyers.	Thus,	customers	with	 are utilised for declaring bonus to 
limited means may not be interested members and for strengthening the 
in this type of trading. general reserves and general welfare 
(v) Delayed delivery:	 There	 is	 no	 funds or similar funds for social and 
immediate delivery of goods to the educational	benefits	of	the	members.
customers, as receipt and execution of To	 start	 a	 consumer	 cooperative	
order	through	mail	takes	its	own	time. store, at least 10 people have to 
(vi) Possibility of abuse:	This	type	of	 come together and form a voluntary 
business provides greater possibility association and get it registered under 
of abuse to dishonest traders to cheat the	 Cooperative	 Societies	 Act.	 The	
the	customers	by	making	false	claims	 capital of a cooperative store is raised 
about the products or not honouring by	 issue	 of	 shares	 to	members.	 The	
the commitments made through hand management of the store is democratic 
bills or advertisements. and entrusted to an elected managing 
(vii) High dependence on postal committee where one man one vote is 
services:	 The	 success	 of	mail	 order	 the	rule.	The	liability	of	the	members	of	
business depends heavily on the a cooperative store is generally limited 
availability	of	efficient	postal	services	 to the extent of the capital contributed 
at	a	place.		But	in	a	vast	country	like	 by	them.	To	ensure	fair	management	
ours, where many places are still of funds, the accounts of the stores are 

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   231 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



232 BUSINESS  STUDIES

audited by the Registrar of Cooperative (vi) Convenient location: 	 The	
Societies	 or	 a	 person	 authorised	 by	 consumer cooperative stores are 
him/her. generally opened at convenient public 

places where the members and others 
Advantages can easily buy the products as per 
The	major	advantages	of	a	consumer	 their requirements.
cooperative store are as follows: Limitations
(i) Ease information: It is easy to 
form a consumer cooperative society. The	limitations	of	consumer	cooperative	
Any ten people can come together stores are given as below:
to form a voluntary association and ( i )  Lack of initiative:  As the 
get themselves registered with the cooperative stores are managed by 
Registrar	of	Cooperative	Societies	by	 people	who	work	on	honorary	basis,	
completing certain formalities. there	 is	a	 lack	of	sufficient	 initiative	
(ii) Limited liability:	 The	 liability	 and	motivation	amongst	them	to	work	
of the members in a cooperative more effectively.
store is limited to the extent of the (ii) Shortage of funds:	 The	primary	
capital contributed by them. Over source of funds for a cooperative 
and above that amount, they are not store is the money raised from 
liable personally to pay for the debts members	 by	 issue	 of	 shares.	 The	
of society, in case the liabilities are stores generally face shortage of funds 
greater than its assets. as	membership	is	limited.	This	comes	
(iii) Democratic management: in the way of growth and expansion of 
Cooperative societies are democratically the cooperative stores.
managed through management (iii) Lack of patronage:	The	members	
committees which are elected by the of the cooperative stores generally do 
members. Each member has one vote, not patronise them regularly. As a 
irrespective of the number of shares result of this, the stores are not able 
held by him/her. to operate successfully.
(iv) Lower prices: A cooperative store (iv) Lack of business training:	 The	
purchases goods directly from the people entrusted with the management 
manufacturers or wholesalers and of	cooperative	stores	lack	expertise	as	
sells them to members and others. they are not trained in running the 
Elimination of middlemen results in 
lower prices for the consumer goods stores	efficiently.
to the members.
(v)  Cash sales: Super Markets

	 The	 consumer	
cooperative stores normally sell A	 super	market	 is	 a	 large	 retailing	
goods on cash basis. As a result, the business unit selling wide variety 
requirement	 for	 working	 capital	 is	 of consumer goods on the basis of 
reduced. low price appeal, wide variety and 

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   232 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



INTERNAL TRADE 233

assortment, self-service and heavy of	 retail	 stores	 because	 of	 bulk	
emphasis on merchandising appeal. purchasing, lower operational 
The	 goods	 traded	 are	 generally	 food	 cost,	and	low	profit	margins.
products and other low priced, branded 	 (v)	 The	goods	are	sold	on	cash	basis	
and widely used consumer products only.
such as grocery, utensils, clothes, 	(vi)	 The	super	markets	are	generally	
electronic appliances, household located at central locations to 
goods,	and	medicines.	Super	markets	 secure high turnover.
are generally situated at the main 
shopping	 centres.	 Goods	 are	 kept	 Advantages
on	 racks	with	 clearly	 labelled	 price	 The	following	are	the	merits	of	super	
and	quality	 tags	 in	such	stores.	The	 markets:
customers move into the store to (i) One roof, low cost:	Super	markets	
pick	up	goods	of	their	requirements,	 offer a wide variety of products at low 
bring	them	to	the	cash	counter,	make	 cost	under	one	roof.	These	outlets	are,	
payment	and	take	home	the	delivery. therefore, not only convenient but also 

Super	markets	 are	 organised	 on	
departmental basis where customers economical	to	the	buyers	for	making	
can buy various types of goods under their purchases.
one roof. However, as compared to (ii) Central location:	 The	 super	
departmental	 stores,	 these	markets	 markets	 are	 generally	 located	 in	 the	
do not offer certain services such as heart of the city. As a result, these 
free home delivery, credit facilities, are easily accessible to large number 
etc., and also do not appoint sales of people staying in the surrounding 
persons to convince customers about localities.
the	quality	of	products.	Some	of	 the	 (iii) Wide selection:	 Super	markets	
important characteristics of a super keep	a	wide	variety	of	goods	of	different	
market	are	as	follows: designs, colour, etc., which enables the 
	 (i)	 A	super	market	generally	carries	 buyers	to	make	better	selection.

a complete line of food items and (iv) No bad debts: As generally the 
groceries, in addition to non-food sales are made on cash basis, there 
convenience goods. are	no	bad	debts	in	super	markets.	

	 (ii)	 The	buyers	can	purchase	different	 (v) Benefits of being  large scale: A 
products as per their requirements super	market	is	a	large	scale	retailing	
under	one	roof	in	such	markets. store.	It	enjoys	all	the	benefits	of	large	

	(iii)	 A	super	market	operates	on	the	 scale buying and selling because of 
principle	 of	 self-service.	 The	 which its operating costs are lower.
distribution cost is, therefore, 
lower. Limitations

	(iv)	 The	 prices	 of	 the	 products	 are	 The	major	limitations	of	super	markets	
generally lower than other types are as follows:

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   233 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



234 BUSINESS  STUDIES

(i) No credit:	Super	markets	sell	their	 area in which this concept is getting 
products on cash basis only. No credit popular in many parts of our country 
facilities are made available to the (particularly in the urban areas) is 
buyers.	This	restricts	the	purchasing	 the	case	of	Automated	Teller	Machines	
power	of	buyers	from	such	markets. (ATM)	 in	 the	 banking	 service.	 As	
(ii) No personal attention:	 Super	 the name suggests, these machines 
markets	work	on	the	principle	of	self-	 have altogether changed the concept 
service.	The	customers,	therefore,	do	 of	 banking	 and	made	 it	 possible	 to	
not get any personal attention. As a withdraw money at any time without 
result, such commodities that require visiting	any	branch	of	a	bank.
personal attention by sales people Vending machines can be useful for 
cannot be handled effectively in super selling	pre-packed	brands	of	low	priced	
markets. products which have high turnover 
(iii) Mishandling of goods:	 Some	 and which are uniform in size and 
customers	handle	 the	 goods	 kept	 in	 weight. However, the initial cost of 
the	 shelf	 carelessly.	 This	may	 raise	 installing a vending machine and the 
costs	in	super	markets. expenditure on regular maintenance 
(iv) High overhead expenses:	Super	 and repair are quite high. Also 
market	incur	high	overhead	expenses.	 consumers cannot feel or see the 

product before buying and do not have 
As a result these have not been able the opportunity of returning unwanted 
to create low price appeal among the goods.	Apart	from	that,	special	packs	
customers. have to be developed for the machines. 
(v) Huge capital requirement: The	machines	have	to	be	made	reliable	
Establishing and running a super in their operations. In spite of these 
market	requires	huge	investment.	The	 limitations, with the growth in the 
turnover of a store should be high so economy, vending machines have a 
that	 the	 overheads	 are	 kept	 under	 promising future in retail sales of high 
reasonable	level.	This	can	be	possible	 turnover and low priced consumer 
in bigger towns but not in small towns. products.

Vending Machines Goods and Services Tax
Vending machines are the newest The	Government	 of	 India,	 following	
revolution	 in	 marketing	 methods. the credo of	‘One	Nation	and	One	Tax’,	
Coin operated vending machines and	wanting	a	unified	market	in	order	
are proving useful in selling several to ensure	 the	 smooth	 flow	 of	 goods	
products such as hot beverages, across the country implemented the 
platform	 tickets,	milk,	 soft	 drinks,	 Goods	 and	 Services	 Tax	 (GST)	 from	
chocolates, newspaper, etc., in many July	1,	2017.	The	move	also	aims	to	
countries. Apart from some of the make	 life	 easier	 for	 	manufacturers,	
products mentioned here, the latest producers, investors and consumers. 

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   234 9/2/2022   2:21:22 PM



INTERNAL TRADE 235

This	 system	 is	 regared	 as	 the	most	 +	9	State	levels)	and	23	cesses	of	the	
revolutionising tax reform in the Indian Centre	and	the	States,	eliminating	the	
taxation	history.	Tax	apart	from	being	 need	 for	 filing	multiple	 returns	 and	
a source of revenue for growth also assessments and rationalising the tax 
plays	a	key	role	in	making	the	State	 treatment of goods and services along 
accountable to its taxpayers. Effective the supply chain from producers to 
taxation ensures that public funds are consumers.	GST	 comprises	 	Central	
effectively	employed	in	fulfilling	social	 GST	 (CGST)	 and	 the	 State	 GST	
objectives for sustainable development. (SGST),	 subsuming	 levies	 previously	

GST	is	a	destination-based	single	 charged	by	the	Central	and	the	State	
tax on the supply of goods and governments respectively.	GST	(CGST	
services from the manufacturer to the +	SGST)	 is	 charged	at	 each	 stage	 of	
consumer, and has replaced multiple value addition and the supplier off-
indirect taxes levied by the Central sets the levy on inputs in the previous 
and	the	State	governments,	 thereby,	 stages of value chain through the tax 
converting	the	country	into	a	unified	 credit	mechanism.	The	last	dealer	in	
market.	Among	other	benefits,	GST	is	 the supply chain passes on the added 
expected to improve the ease of doing GST	to	the	consumer,	making	GST	a	
business in tax compliance, reduce destination-based consumption tax. 
the tax burden by eliminating tax- The	provision	of	availing	input	credit	
on-tax, improve tax administration, at each stage of value chain helps in 
mitigate tax evasion, broaden the avoiding the cascading effect (tax on 
organised segment of the economy tax)	 under	 GST,	 which	 is	 expected	
and	boost	tax	revenues.	The	GST	has	 to reduce prices of commodities and 
replaced 17 indirect taxes (8 Central benefit	the	consumers.	(refer	page	253)

Some Facts about GST
	 1.	 GST	aims	to	subsume	a	plethora	of	taxes	into	one	single	tax	across	the	

country	and	make	goods	uniformly	priced	across	India,	albeit	some	goods	
become costly and some become cheaper.

	 2.	 With	the	implementation	of	GST,	luxury	goods	have	become	costlier,	while	
items of mass consumption have become cheaper. 

	 3.		 GST	is	not	taxation	at	source.	It	is	a	destination	tax	or	rather	it’s	a	consumption	
tax.	A	product	is	manufactured	in	Tamil	Nadu	and	travels	through	the	country	
before it reaches Delhi, where the buyer or consumer pays tax for it. Both 
the	Centre	and	the	State	have	their	share	in	this	tax.	

	 4.	 The	Indian	GST	will	have	a	mechanism	of	matching	of	invoices.	Input	tax	credit	of	
purchased goods and services will only be available if the taxable supplies received 
by	the	supplies	received	by	the	supplier.	The	Goods	and	Services	Tax	network	is	a	 
self-regulating	mechanism,	which	not	only	checks	tax	frauds	and	tax	evasion,	
but also brings in more and more businesses into the formal economy.

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   235 9/2/2022   2:21:22 PM



236 BUSINESS  STUDIES

	 5.	 Anti-profiteering	measure	is	one	of	the	key	features	of	the	recently	implemented	
Goods	and	Services	Tax	law.	These	measures	prevent	entities	from	making	
excessive	profits.	Since	the	GST,	along	with	the	input	tax	credit,	is	eventually	
expected	to	bring	down	prices,	a	National	Anti-profiteering	Authority	(NAA)	is	
to	be	set	up	to	ensure	that	the	benefits	accrued	to	entities	due	to	reduction	in	
costs	is	passed	on	to	the	consumers.	Also,	entities	that	hike	rates	inordinately,	
citing	GST	as	the	reason,	will	be	checked	by	this	body.

How will GST Benefit and Empower Citizens
	Reduction	in	overall	tax	burden
	No	hidden	taxes
	Development	of	a	harmonised	national	market	for	goods	and	services
	Higher	disposable	income	in	hand,	education	and	essential	needs
	Customers	to	have	wider	choice
	Increased	economic	activity
	More	employment	opportunities

Key Features of GST:
	 1.	 The	territorial	spread	of	GST	is	the	whole	country.
	 2.	 GST	is	applicable	on		the	‘supply’	of	goods	or	services	as	against	the	present	

concept	of	tax	on	the	manufacture	or		sale	of	goods	or	on	the	provision	of	
services.

	 3.	 It	is	based	on	the	principle	of	destination-based	consumption	tax	against	
the	present	principle	of	origin-based	taxation.

	 4.	 Import	 of	 goods	 and	 services	 is	 treated	 as	 inter-State	 supplies	 and	
would		 be	subject	to	IGST	in	addition	to	the	applicable	customs	duties.

	 5.	 CGST,	SGST	and		IGST	are	levied	at	rates	mutually	agreed	upon	by	the	
Centre	and	the	States	under	the	aegis	of	the	GST	Council.

	 6.	 There	are	four	tax	slabs	namely	5	per	cent,	12	per	cent,	18	per	cent	and				
28	per	cent	for	all	goods	or	services.

	 7.	 Exports	and	supplies	to	SEZ	are	zero-rated.
	 8.	 There	 are	 various	modes	 of	 payment	 of	 tax	 available	 to	 the	 taxpayer,	

including	 Internet	 banking,	 debit/credit	 card	 and	National	 Electronic	
Funds	Transfer	(NEFT)/Real	Time	Gross	Settlement	(RTGS).

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   236 10/21/2022   2:48:25 PM



INTERNAL TRADE 237

GST Council – Constitution
	 Chairperson:	Finance	Minister
	 Vice	Chairperson	is	to	be	chosen	amongst	the	Ministers	of	State		
	 Government
	Members:	MoS	 (Finance)	 and	 all	Ministers	 of	 Finance/Taxation	 of	  
	 each	State
	Quorum is 50% of total members
	 States	have	two-third	weightage	and	Centre	has	one-third	weightage
	Decision	is	taken	by	75%	majority
	 The	Council	shall	make	recommendations	on	everything	related	to	GST	 
 including, rules and rates, etc.

The	CGST/
SGST		is	payable	
on all intra-state 
supply of goods or 
services or both

IGST	is	payable	

GST on all inter-state 
supply of goods 

and services

Tax	liability	
arises when the 
taxable person 

crosses exemption 
limit

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   237 9/2/2022   2:21:22 PM



238 BUSINESS  STUDIES

10.6 role of commerce and For example, the construction of golden 
Industry assocIatIons Is In quadrilateral corridor announced by 
promotIon of Internal trade the	Prime	Minister	of	India	in	one	of	

the	 Annual	General	Meetings	 of	 the	
Associations of business and industrial Federation of Indian Chambers of 
houses are formed to promote and Commerce and  Industry (FICCI) will 
protect their common interest and facilitate internal trade.
goals.	Many	 such	 associations	have	 (ii) Octroi and other local levies: 
been formed and are present in the Octroi and local taxes are the 
country such as Associated Chamber of important sources of revenue of the 
Commerce	and	Industry	(ASSOCHAM),	 local	government.	These	are	collected	
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) on the goods and from people entering 
and Federation of Indian Chambers of the	state	or	the	municipal	limits.	The	
Commerce	and	Industry	(FICCI).	These	 Chambers of Commerce try to ensure 
associations or chambers act as the that their imposition is not at the cost 
national guardians of trade, commerce of smooth  transportation and  local 
and industry. trade.

These	 associations	 have	 been	 (iii) Harmonisation of sales tax 
playing a catalytic role in strengthening structure and  Value  Added  Tax: 
internal	trade	to	make	it	an	important	 The	 Chambers	 of	 Commerce	 and	
part	 of	 overall	 economic	 activity.The	 Industry play an important role in 
Chambers of Commerce and Industry interacting with the government to 
interact with the government at harmonise the sales tax structure in 
different levels to reorient or put in different	 states.	 The	 sales	 tax	 is	 an	
place policies which reduce hindrances, important part of   the  state revenue. 
increase interstate  movement of A rational structure of the sales tax 
goods, introduce transparency and and its uniform rates across states, 
remove multiple layers of  inspection are important for promoting a balance 
and bureaucratic hurdles. Besides, in trade. As per the new policy of the 
the chambers also aim at erecting government,	 the	Value	Added	Tax	 is	
sound infrastructure and simplifying being levied in place of the sales tax 
and harmonising the tax structures. to remove  the cascading effect of the 
The		interventions		are		mainly		in		the	 sales tax.
following  areas: (iv) Marketing of agro products and 
(i) Interstate movement of goods: related issues:	 The	 associations	 of	
The	 Chambers	 of	 Commerce	 and	 agriculturists and other federations 
Industry help in many activities play	an	important	role	in	the	marketing	
concerning inter state movement of of	agro	products.	Streamlining	of	local	
goods which include registration of subsidies	 and	marketing	 policies	 of	
vehicles, surface transport policies, organisations selling agro products are 
construction of highways and roads. some of the areas where the Chambers 

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   238 9/2/2022   2:21:22 PM



INTERNAL TRADE 239

of Commerce and Industry can really need to interact with the government 
intervene and interact with concerned to ensure streamlining of excise duties.
agencies	like	farming	cooperatives. (vii) Promoting sound infrastructure: 
(v) Weights and Measures and A	 sound	 infrastructure	 like	 road,	
prevention of duplication brands: port, electricity, railways etc., play a 
Laws relating to  weights and measures catalytic	role	in	promoting	trade.	The	
and protection of brands are necessary Chambers of Commerce and Industry 
to protect the interest of the consumers hold discussions with government 
as	well	as	the	traders.	These	need	to	
be	enforced	strictly.	The	Chambers	of	 agencies for investments into these 
Commerce and Industry interact with projects.
the government to formulate such laws (viii) Labour legislation: A simple 
and	 take	 action	 against	 those	 who	 and flexible labour legislation is 
violate rules and regulations. helpful in running industries, 
(vi) Excise duty: Central  excise is maximising production and  generating 
the chief  source of  the  government employment.	 The	 Chambers	 of	
revenue levied  across  states  by  the Commerce and Industry and the 
central		government.	The		excise		policy	 government are constantly interacting 
plays  an important  role  in  pricing on	issues	like	labour	laws,	retrenchment	
mechanism.	 The	 trade	 associations	 etc. with the government.

Key Terms

Internal	trade	 Wholesalers	 Market	traders
Wholesale	trade	 Retailers	 Cheap	jacks
Retail	trade	 Internal	retailers	 Speciality	stores
Departmental stores Chain stores Vending machines
	 Super	markets	 Chambers	of	Commerce

SUMMARY

Trade	refers	to	buying	and	selling	of	goods	and	services	with	the	objective	of	
earning	profit	on	the	basis	of	geographical	 location	of	buyers	and	sellers.	 It	
can	be	classified	into	two	categories	(i)	internal	trade;	and	(ii)	external	trade.
Internal trade: Buying and selling of goods and services within the boundaries 
of a nation are referred to as internal trade. No custom duties or import duties 
are levied on such trade as goods are part of domestic production and are 
meant for domestic consumption. Internal trade can be categorised into two 
broad categories (i) wholesale trade; and (ii) retailing trade.

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   239 9/2/2022   2:21:22 PM



240 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Wholesale trade: Purchase and sale of goods and services in large quantities 
for the purposes of resale or intermediate use is referred to as wholesale trade. 
Wholesalers perform a number of functions in the process of distribution 
of goods and services and provide valuable services to manufacturers and 
retailers.
Services of wholesalers:	 Wholesalers	 are	 an	 important	 link	 between	
manufacturers	and	retailers.	They	add	value	by	creating	time	and	place	utility.	
Services of manufacturers:	 The	 services	 provided	 by	 wholesalers	 to	
manufacturers	include	(i)	facilitating	large	scale	production;	(ii)	bearing	risk;	
(iii)	 providing	 financial	 assistance;	 (iv)	 expert	 advice;	 (v)	 help	 in	marketing	
function; (vi) facilitating continuity; and (vii) storage.
Services to retailers:	The	services	provided	by	wholesalers	to	retailers	include	
(i)	availability	of	goods	(ii)	marketing	support	(iii)	grant	of	credit	(iv)	specialised	
knowledge	(v)	risk	sharing
Retail trade: A retailer is a business enterprise that is engaged in the sale of 
goods and services directly to the ultimate consumers.
Services of retailers:	Retailers	are	an	important	link	between	the	producers	
and	final	consumers.	They	provide	useful	service	to	consumers	wholesalers	
and manufacturers in the distribution of products and services.
Services to manufacturers/wholesalers: Different services provided by 
retailers to wholesalers and manufacturers include (i) helping distribution of 
goods; (ii) personal selling; (iii) enabling large scale operations; (iv) collecting 
market	information;	and	(v)	help	in	promotion	of	goods	and	services.
Services to consumers:	 The	 different	 services	 provided	 by	 retailers	 to	
consumers include (i) regular availability of products (ii) new product 
information (iii) convenience of buying (iv) trade selection (v) after sales services 
and (vi) providing credit facilities.
Types of retail trade:	 Retail	 trade	 can	 be	 classified	 into	 different	 types	
according to their size, type of ownership, on the basis of merchandise 
handled	and	whether	they	have	fixed	place	of	business	or	not.	Retailers	can	be	
categorised	as	(i)	itinerant	retailers;	and	(ii)	fixed	shop	retailers.
Itinerant retailers:	Itinerant	retailers	are	traders	who	don’t	have	a	fixed	place	
of	 business	 to	 operate	 from.	 They	 are	 small	 traders	 operating	with	 limited	
resources	who	keep	on	moving	with	their	wares	from	street	to	street	or	place	
to	place	in	search	of	customers.	The	major	types	of	such	retailers	are:
(i)	Peddlers	and	hawkers: They	are	small	producers	or	petty	traders	who	carry	
the products on a bicycle or handcart or on their heads and move from place 
to place, to sell their goods at the doorstep of the customers.

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   240 9/2/2022   2:21:22 PM



INTERNAL TRADE 241

(ii)	Market	traders:	Market	traders	are	small	retailers	who	open	their	shops	at	
different	places	on	fixed	days/dates,	catering	mainly	to	lower	income	group	of	
customers and dealing in low priced consumer items of daily use.
(iii)	 Street	 trades:	 Street	 traders	 are	 the	 small	 retailers	who	 are	 commonly	
found	at	places	where	huge	floating	population	gathers.
(iv)	Cheap	jacks:	Cheap	jacks	are	those	petty	retailers	who	have	independent	
shops	of	a	temporary	nature	in	a	business	location.	They	deal	 in	consumer	
items	 and	 provide	 services	 to	 consumers	 in	 terms	 of	making	 the	 products	
available where needed.
Fixed shop retailers:	On	the	basis	of	size	of	operations,	(fixed	shop	retailers	
can	be	classified	as	a)	small	shopkeepers	and	(b)	large	retailers.
Fixed shop small retailers
(i)	General	stores:	General	stores	carry	stock	of	a	variety	of	products	such	as	
grocery	 items,	 soft	 drinks,	 toiletry	 products,	 confectionery,	 and	 stationery,	
needed to satisfy day-to-day needs of consumers, residing in nearby localities.
(ii)	 Speciality	 shops:	 Speciality	 shops	 specialise	 in	 the	 sale	 of	 specific	 line	
of products such as children’s garments, men’s wear, ladies shoes, school 
uniform,	college	books	or	consumer	electronic	goods,	etc.,
(iii)	Street	 stall	holders:	These	small	 vendors	are	commonly	 found	at	 street	
crossing	or	other	places	where	flow	of	traffic	is	heavy	and	deal	mainly	in	goods	
of	cheap	variety	like	hosiery	products,	toys,	cigarettes,	soft	drinks,	etc.
(iv)	Second	hand	goods	shop:	These	shops	deals	in	second	hand	or	used	goods	
of	different	kinds	like	furniture,	books,	clothes	and	other	household	articles	
which are sold at lower prices.
(v)	Single	line	stores:	Single	line	stores	deal	in	a	single	product	line	such	as	
ready	made	garments,	watches,	shoes	etc.,	and	keep	variety	of	 items	of	the	
same line and are situated at central location.
Fixed shop large stores:	In	fixed	shop	large	stores,	the	volume	and	variety	of	
goods	stocked	is	large.
Departmental stores: A departmental store is a large establishment offering 
a	wide	variety	of	products,	classified	into	well-designed	departments,	aimed	at	
satisfying practically every customer’s need under one roof.
Advantages: (a) attracts large number of customers (b) convenience 
in buying (c) attractive services (d) economy of large scale operation 
(e) promotion of sales.
Limitations: (a)	 lacks	 personal	 attention	 (b)	 high	 operating	 cost	 (c)	 high	
possibility of loss (d) inconvenient location.

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   241 9/2/2022   2:21:22 PM



242 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Chain stores or multiple shops:	These	shops	are	networks	of	retail	shops	
that are owned and operated by manufacturers or intermediaries dealing in 
standardised and branded consumer products having rapid sales turnover.
Advantages:  (a) economies of scale (b) elimination of middlemen  
(c)	 no	 bad	 debts	 (d)	 transfer	 of	 goods	 (e)	 diffusion	 of	 risk	 (e)	 low	 cost	  
(f)	flexibility.
Limitations:	(a)	limited	selection	of	goods	(b)	lack	of	initiative	(c)	lack	of	personal	
touch	(d)	difficult	to	change	demand.
Difference between Departmental Stores and Multiple Shops: (a) location 
(b) range of products (c) services offered (d) pricing (e) class of customers 
(f)	credit	facilities	(g)	flexibility.
Mail order houses:	 Mail	 order	 houses	 are	 retail	 outlets	 that	 sell	 their	
merchandise through mail, without any direct personal contact with  
the buyers.
Advantages: (a) limited capital requirements (b) elimination of middlemen, (c) 
absence of bad debts (d) wide reach (e) convenience.
Limitations:	(a)	lack	of	personal	contact,	(b)	high	promotion	cost	(c)	no	after	
sales services (d) no credit facilities (e) delayed delivery (f) possibility of abuse 
(g) high dependence on postal services.
Consumer cooperative stores: A consumer cooperative store is an 
organisation owned managed and controlled by consumers themselves formed 
with the objective of reducing the number of middlemen and thereby providing 
services to members.
Advantages: (i) ease in formation (ii) limited liability (iii) democratic management 
(iv) lower prices (v) cash sales (vi) convenient location.
Limitations:	(i)	lack	of	initiative	(ii)shortage	of	funds	(iii)	lack	of	patronage	(iv)	
lack	of	business	training.
Super markets:	A	super	market	is	a	large	retailing	business	unit	selling	wide	
variety of consumer goods on the basis of low margin appeal, wide variety and 
assortment and heavy emphasis on merchandising appeal.
Advantages: (i) one roof, low cost (ii) central location (iii) wide selection (iv) no 
bad	debts	(v)	benefits	of	large	scale.
Limitations: (a) no credit (b) no personal attention (c) mishandling of goods (d) 
high over head expenses (e) huge capital requirements.
Vending Machines: Vending machines are proving useful in selling 
pre-packed	brands	of	low	priced	products	which	have	high	turnover	and	which	
are uniform in size and weight.

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   242 9/2/2022   2:21:22 PM



INTERNAL TRADE 243

EXERCISES

Short Answer Questions
1. What is meant by internal trade?
2. Specify	the	characteristics	of	fixed	shop	retailers.
3. What purpose is served by wholesalers providing warehousing facilities?
4. How	 does	 market	 information	 provided	 by	 the	 wholesalers	 benefit	 the	

manufacturers?
5. How does the wholesaler help the manufacturer in availing the economies of 

scale?
6. Distinguish between single line stores and speciality stores. Can you identify 

such stores in your locality?
7. How would you differentiate between street traders and street shops?
8. Explain the services offered by wholesalers to manufacturers.
9. What are the services offered by retailers to wholesalers and consumers?

Long Answer Questions
1. Itinerant traders have been an integral part of internal trade in India.  Analyse 

the reasons for their survival in spite of competition from large scale retailers.
2. Discuss the features of a departmental store. How are they different from 

multiple shops or chain stores.
3. Why are consumer cooperative stores considered to be less expensive? What 

are its relative advantages over other large scale retailers?
4. Imagine	life	without	your	local	market.	What	difficulties	would	a	consumer	

face if there is no retail shop?
5. Explain the usefulness of mail orders houses. What type of products are 

generally	handled	by	them?	Specify.

Projects/Assignments
1. Identify	 various	 fixed	 shop	 retailers	 in	 your	 locality	 and	 classify	 them	

according to the different types you have studied.
2. Do	you	know	any	retailers	selling	second-hand	goods	in	your	area?	Find	out	

the category of the product that they deal in? Which products are suitable 
for	resale?	List	some	of	your	findings.	What	conclusions	do	you	draw?

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   243 9/2/2022   2:21:22 PM



244 BUSINESS  STUDIES

3. Do you observe any difference in the retail business of yesterday and the 
times to come. Prepare a brief write-up and discuss it in class.

4. From you own experience, compare the features of two retail stores selling 
the same product. For example, the same products being sold at a small 
scale	 retailer	 like	 a	 general	 store	 and	 in	 a	 big	 store	 like	 a	 departmental	
store. What similarities and differences can you identify in terms of price, 
service, variety, convenience, etc.

5. The	GST	has	been	rolled	out	by	the	Government	of	India	on	July,	01,	2017.	
Different	goods	and	services	are	classified	under	GST	rates	viz.,	0%,	5%,	
12%,	 18%	 and	 28%.	 Collect	 the	 information	 on	 GST	 from	 newspapers,	
media news, Internet and business magazines and classify the given goods 
and	services	five	GST	rates:

Activity: Classification of GST Rates of different Goods and Services
Items No tax (0%) 5%        12%   18%     28%

Jute
Newspaper
Coffee/Tea
Shampoo
Washing	Machine
Motorcycles
Vegetables
Milk
Curd
Salt
Spices
Kerosene
Kites
Apparel
above Rs 1000
Cheese
Ghee
Fruit Juices
Bhujia
Ayurvedic	Medicines

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   244 9/2/2022   2:21:22 PM



INTERNAL TRADE 245

Sewing	Machine
Cell Phones
Ketchup	&	Sauces
Exercise	Books
Notebooks
Spectacles
Luxury goods
Fertilisers
Biscuits
Pasta
Pastries	and	cakes
Jams
Mineral	Water
Steel
Products
Camera
Speakers	and	monitors
Aluminum Foil
CCTV
Telecom	Services
Branded	Garments

2024-25

Chapter 10.indd   245 9/2/2022   2:21:22 PM