Chapter 9

MSME and BuSinESS EntrEprEnEurShip

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

After studying this chapter, you should be able to:

•	 explain the meaning and nature of MSME in India;

•	 appreciate the role of MSME in India;

•	 analyse the problems faced by of MSME in India; and

•	 discuss the role of innovation and entrepreneurship for MSMEs

2024-25

Chapter 9.indd   198 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM



MSME and BuSinESS EntrEprEnEurShip 199

Romi Bags of Manipur
Khumbongmayum Dhanachandra Singh didn’t have much in life. The son of a poor 
tailor, he wasn’t brought up with many privileges. He saw his father working day 
and night to earn a meagre income. He saw the rich getting richer and the poor 
remaining poor. The boy wanted to do something more in life. He couldn’t imagine 
a life of stitching clothes relentlessly and earn just enough to survive.

Imphal is a small city in Manipur. Hardworking men and women send 
their children away to bigger cities so they can have opportunities to progress. 
Khumbongmayum’s father couldn’t afford to send him or even educate him. He just 
taught him what he knew— tailoring. Fabrics, stitching and clothing styles was 
what the boy grew up with. There was only one sewing machine and the boy used 
it when his father wasn’t using it. He learnt it silently because he knew it was what 
his father wanted, but his heart wasn’t in it.

Sometimes an incident can change your life. This happened to Khumbongmayum 
when he stitched a purse made out of leftover fabrics from his father’s scraps. 
Khumbongmayum offered the purse to his friend who marvelled at the unique design. 
The friend in turn showed the interesting purse to his other friends. They asked 
Khumbongmayum if he could make such purses for them also. It led him to wonder if 
there was a market for his designs. And he knew he had stumbled on to his business 
venture. He made a business plan and launched a purse making venture ‘Romi 
Bags’ in 1996. Khumbongmayum was not one to do anything on a whim. He noticed 
the demands of his product and he calculated his costs, expenses and expected 
income. In 2007, he received the National Award for bag making under Micro and 
Medium Enterprises.  For him, though it’s just the beginning, Khumbongmayum 
Dhanchandra Singh has changed his life by sheer grit, perseverance and hard work. 
You can’t let anything stop you from moving forward. You can’t become successful 
or reach the top if you don’t listen and hear effectively.

9.1 IntroductIon MSMEs play a significant role in 
the economic growth and contribute 

Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises approximately 29.7 per cent of GDP 
(MSME) contribute significantly to and 49.66 per cent of exports. The 
the development process and acts as sector offers employment to nearly 
a vital link in the industrialisation 60 million people through 28.5 million 
in terms of production, employment enterprises, after the agriculture 
and exports for economic prosperity sector. MSMEs are complementary to 
by widening entrepreneurial base large industries as ancillary units and 
and use of local raw materials and form an integral part of value chain for 
indigenous skills. MSME dominate the building a conducive environment for 
industrial scenario in the country with indigenous skills, grass root innovations 
sizeable proportion of labour force and and entrepreneurship development. 
tremendous export potential. This sector produces a wide range of 

2024-25

Chapter 9.indd   199 18-04-2024   11:33:03



200 BUSINESS  STUDIES

products, from simple consumer handicrafts, coir, sericulture, khadi 
goods to high-precision, sophisticated and village industries, small scale 
finished	products.	 industries and powerlooms. The 

Recognising the potential of this Khadi and Village Industries and Coir 
sector for the national development, segment is another major contributor 
this segment of industry is encouraged 
in both in pre-reform and post–reform to the growth of the MSME. Many 
period	for	fulfilling	the	objective	of	self- global companies are increasingly 
reliance and rural industrialisation. looking to Indian MSMEs for strategic 

In India, the MSME consists of partnerships	 of	mutual	 benefit	 due	
both ‘traditional’ and ‘modern’ small to the innovative capabilities in niche 
industries. This sector has eight of low-cost manufacturing and local 
subgroups. They are handlooms, skills and capabilities. 

The Diversity of the Indian MSME Sector
MSME Tool Rooms have been credited to provide at least 10 components for 
Mangalyaan	(Mars	Orbiter	Mission	probe),	India’s	first	inter-planetary	space	mission.	
It has contributed vital inputs for other space satellites such as the Chandrayan. 
India’s second moon mission.  Chandrayaan-2, which was successfully launched 
on July 22, 2019 the moon mission of India, acknowledges the contribution Central 
Tool Room and Training Centre (CTTC) Bhubaneswar and Institute for Design 
of Electrical Measuring Instruments (IDEMI) Mumbai in developing several vital 
components for the Cryogenic engine of the Launch Vehicle, Navigational assemblies 
of the Lunar Orbiter and the wheel assemblies for the Moon Launch. MSMEs are 
now only not limited up to small business but their contribution starts from ground 
level which directly creates a major effect on such big missions. This sector, thus, 
holds key to inclusive growth and plays a critical role in India’s future.
Source: Ministry of MSME, MSME Insider, 2019, Government of India.

9.2 Micro, SMall and MEdiuM The def init ion used by the 
EntErpriSES Government of India to describe 

It is important to know how size is MSME is based on the investment in 
defined	in	our	country,	with	reference	 plant and machinery and turnover. 
to MSME establishments. Several This measure seeks to keep in view the 
parameters can be used to measure the socio-economic environment in India 
size of business units. These include where capital is scarce and labour is 
the number of persons employed in abundant.
business, capital invested in business, 
turnover of business, etc.

2024-25

Chapter 9.indd   200 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM



MSME AND BUSINESS ENTREPRENEURSHIP 201

Type of Units Investment in Plant 
and Machinery Turnover

Micro Enterprises 1 Crore Does not exceed 5 crore

Small Enterprises 10 Crore Does not exceed 50 crore

Medium Enterprises 50 Crore Does not exceed 250 core

% share of MSMES in

Micro Enterprises 99.4%

Small Enterprises 0.52%

Medium Enterprises 0.1%

The emergence of a large service concerns of such enterprises as micro, 
sector has necessitated the government small and medium and provide them 
to include other enterprises covering with a single legal framework. The 
both Small Scale Industries (SSI) sector MSMED Act, 2006 came into force 
and related service entities under the w.e.f., October, 2006. The Micro, Small 
same umbrella. Expansion of the small and Medium Enterprises Development 
enterprises was taking place growing (MSMED) Act, 2006 addressed these 
into medium enterprises and they issues relating to its definition, 
were required to adopt higher levels credit, marketing and technology up 
of technologies in order to remain gradation. Medium scale enterprises 
competitive in a fast globalising world. and service related enterprises also 
Thus, it was necessary to address the come under the purview of this Act. 

Village Industries
Village	industry	has	been	defined	as	any	industry	located	in	a	rural	area	which	
produces any goods, renders any service with or without the use of power and in 
which	the	fixed	capital	investment	per	head	or	artisan	or	worker	is	specified	by	
the central government, from time to time.
Cottage Industries
Cottage industries are also known as rural industries or traditional industries. 
They	are	not	defined	by	capital	investment	criteria	as	in	the	case	of	other	small	
scale industries.

2024-25

Chapter 9.indd   201 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM



202 BUSINESS  STUDIES

9.3 rolE of MSME intensive. This is a boon for a 
labour surplus country like India.

MSME in India enjoy a distinct position  (iii) MSME in our country supply an 
in view of their contribution to the enormous variety of products 
socio-economic development of the which include mass consumption 
country. The emphasis on MSME has goods, readymade garments, 
always been an integral part of India’s hosiery goods, stationery items, 
industrial strategy. Development of soaps and detergents, domestic 
MSME prevents migration of rural utensils, leather, plastic and 
population to urban areas in search rubber goods, processed foods 
of employment and contributes to and vegetables, wood and steel 
other socio-economic aspects, such furniture, paints, varnishes, 
as reduction in income inequalities, safety matches, etc. Among 
dispersed development of industries t h e  s o p h i s t i c a t e d  i t e m s 
and linkage with other sectors of the manufactured are electric and 
economy. electronic goods like televisions, 

In fact promotion of MSME and calculators, electro-medical 
rural industrialisation has been equipment, electronic teaching 
considered by the Government of India aids like overhead projectors, air 
as a powerful instrument for realising conditioning equipment, drugs 
the twin objectives of ‘accelerated and pharmaceuticals, agricultural 
industrial growth and creating tools and equipment and several 
additional productive employment other engineering products. A 
potential in rural and backward areas.’ special mention should be made 

The following points highlight their of handlooms, handicrafts and 
contribution. other products from traditional 
 (i) The contr ibut ion of  these village industries in view of their 

industries to the balanced regional export value.
development of our country is  (iv) MSME which produce simple 
noteworthy. Small industries in p r o d u c t s  u s i n g  s i m p l e 
India account for 95 per cent of technologies and depend on 
the industrial units in the country. locally available resources both 

 (ii) MSME are the second largest material and labour can be set up 
employers of human resources, anywhere in the country. Since 
after agriculture. They generate they can be widely spread without 
more number of employment any locational constraints, the 
opportunities per unit of capital benefits	 of	 industrialisation	 can	
invested compared to large be reaped by every region. They, 
industries. They are, therefore, thus,	 contribute	 significantly	 to	
considered to be more labour the balanced development of the 
intensive and less capital country.

2024-25

Chapter 9.indd   202 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM



MSME AND BUSINESS ENTREPRENEURSHIP 203

 (v) MSME provide ample opportunity modern technology, procurement of 
for entrepreneurship. The latent raw materials are some of these areas. 
skills and talents of people can This gives rise to several problems.
be channelled into business ideas The problems majorly include 
which can be converted into reality remote location with less developed 
with little capital investment and infrastructural facilities, lack of 
almost nil formalities to start a managerial talent, poor quality, 
small business. traditional technology and inadequate 

 (vi) MSME also enjoy the advantage availability	 of	 finance.	 The	problems	
of low cost of production. Locally of exporting small scale units include 
available resources are less lack of adequate data on foreign 
expensive. Establishment and markets, lack of market intelligence, 
running costs of small industries exchange	 rate	 fluctuations,	 quality	
are on the lower side because of standards,	and	pre-shipment	finance.	
low overhead expenses. Infact, In general the small businesses are 
the low cost of production which faced with the following problems:
small industries enjoy is their (i) Finance: One of the severe 
competitive strength. problems faced by MSME is that of 

 (vii) Due to the small size of the non-availability	 of	 adequate	 finance	
organ isa t i ons ,  qu ick  and to carry out its operations. Generally 
timely decisions can be taken these businesses begin with a small 
without consulting many people capital base. Many of the units in the 
as it happens in large sized small sector lack the credit worthiness 
organisations. New business required to raise as capital from the 
opportunities can be captured at capital markets. As a result, they 
the right time. heavily depend on local financial 

resources and are frequently the 
9.5 proBlEMS aSSociatEd With MSME victims of exploitation by the money 
The potential of MSME is often not lenders. These units frequently suffer 
realised fully, because of several from lack of adequate working capital, 
problems related to size and operations. either due to delayed payment of dues 
We shall now examine some of the to them or locking up of their capital in 
major problems that small businesses unsold stocks. Banks also do not lend 
whether in urban or in rural areas money without adequate collateral 
are encountering in their day-to-day security or guarantees and margin 
functioning. money, which many of them are not 

M SMEs  a r e  a t  a  d i s t i n c t in a position to provide.
disadvantage as compared to largescale (ii) Raw materials: Another major 
industries. The scale of operations, problem of MSME is the procurement 
availability	 of	 finance,	 ability	 to	 use	 of raw materials. If the required 

2024-25

Chapter 9.indd   203 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM



204 BUSINESS  STUDIES

materials are not available, they have may not be feasible for small business 
to compromise on the quality or have firms as they lack the necessary 
to pay a high price to get good quality infrastructure.
materials. Their bargaining power is 
relatively low due to the small quantity (v) Quality: Many MSMEs do not 
of purchases made by them. Also, they adhere to desired standards of quality. 
cannot afford to take the risk of buying Instead they concentrate on cutting the 
in bulk as they have no facilities cost and keeping the prices low. They 
to store the materials. Because of do not have adequate resources to 
general scarcity of metals, chemicals invest in quality research and maintain 
and extractive raw materials in the the standards of the industry, nor do 
economy, the small scale sector suffers they have the expertise to upgrade 
the most. This also means a waste of technology. In fact maintaining quality 
production capacity for the economy is their weakest point, when competing 
and loss of further units. in global markets.
( i i i )  Managerial skil ls:  These (vi) Capacity utilisation: Due to lack 
businesses are generally promoted and of marketing skills or lack of demand, 
operated by a single person, who may many	firms	have	to	operate	below	full	
not possess all the managerial skills capacity due to which their operating 
required to run the business. Many costs tend to increase. Gradually this 
of the small business entrepreneurs leads to sickness and closure of the 
possess sound technical knowledge business.
but are less successful in marketing (vii)  Global competition: Apart from 
the output. Moreover, they may not the problems stated above MSME are 
find	 enough	 time	 to	 take	 care	 of	 all	 not without fears, especially in the 
functional activities. At the same time present context of globalisation. These 
they are not in a position to afford 
professional managers. enterprises face competition is not only 

from medium and large industries, but 
(iv) Marketing: Marketing is one also from multinational companies 
of the most important activities which are giants in terms of their size 
as it generates revenue. Effective and business volumes. 
marketing of goods requires a thorough 
understanding of the customer’s needs 9.7 MSME and EntrEprEnEurShip 
and requirements. In most cases, dEvElopMEnt
marketing is a weaker area of small 
organisations. These organisations Entrepreneurship is the process of 
have, therefore, to depend excessively setting up one’s own business as 
on middlemen, who at times exploit distinct from pursuing any other 
them by paying low price and delayed economic activity, be it employment 
payments. Further, direct marketing or practising some profession. The 

2024-25

Chapter 9.indd   204 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM



MSME AND BUSINESS ENTREPRENEURSHIP 205

person who set-up his business is step-by-step and purposeful activity. 
called an entrepreneur. The output of It has certain temperamental, skill 
the process, that is, the business unit and other knowledge and competency 
is called an enterprise. It is interesting requirements that can be acquired, 
to note that entrepreneurship learnt and developed, both by formal 
besides providing self-employment educational and vocational training 
to the entrepreneur is responsible as well as by observation and work 
to a great extent for creation and experience. Such an understanding 
expansion of opportunities for the of the process of entrepreneurship is 
other two economic activities, that crucial for dispelling the myth that 
is, employment and profession. And, entrepreneurs are born rather than 
in the process, entrepreneurship made.
becomes crucial for overall economic (ii) Lawful and Purposeful Activity: 
development of a nation. The object of entrepreneurship is 

Every country, whether developed lawful business. It is important to 
or developing, needs entrepreneurs. take note of this as one may try 
Whereas, a developing country needs to legitimise unlawful actions as 
entrepreneurs to initiate the process entrepreneurship on the grounds that 
of development, the developed one just as entrepreneurship entails risk, 
needs entrepreneurship to sustain so does illicit businesses. Purpose of 
it. In the present Indian context, entrepreneurship is creation of value 
where on the one hand, employment for	personal	profit	and	social	gain.
opportunities in public sector and 
large-scale sector are shrinking, and (iii) Innovation: From the point of 
on the other, vast opportunities arising view	 of	 the	 firm,	 innovation	may	 be	
from globalisation are waiting to be cost saving or revenue-enhancing. If 
exploited; entrepreneurship can really it does both it is more than welcome. 
take India to the heights of becoming a Even if it does none, it is still welcome 
super economic power. Thus, the need as innovation must become a habit!
for entrepreneurship arises from the Entrepreneurship is creative in 
functions the entrepreneurs perform the sense that it involves creation 

of value. By combining the various 
in relation to the process of economic factors of production, entrepreneurs 
development and in relation to the produce goods and services that meet 
business enterprise. the needs and wants of the society. 

The following are the characteristics Every entrepreneurial act results 
of entrepreneurship: in income and wealth generation. 
(i) S y s t e m a t i c  A c t i v i t y : Entrepreneurship is creative also in 
Entrepreneurship is not a mysterious the sense that it involves innovation-
gift or charm and something that introduction of new products, discovery 
happens by chance! It is a systematic, of new markets and sources of supply 

2024-25

Chapter 9.indd   205 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM



206 BUSINESS  STUDIES

of inputs, technological breakthroughs employment or practice of a profession 
as well as introduction of newer as there is no “assured” payoff. In 
organisational forms for doing things practice, for example, when a person 
better, cheaper, faster and, in the quits a job to start on his own, he 
present context, in a manner that tries to calculate whether he or she 
causes the least harm to the ecology/ would be able to earn the same level 
environment. of income or not. To an observer, the 

risk of quitting a well-entrenched and 
(iv) Organisation of Production: promising career seems a “high” risk, 
Production, implying creation of form, but what the person has taken is a 
place, time personal utility, requires calculated risk. They are so sure of 
the combined utilisation of diverse their capabilities that they convert 50 
factors of production, land, labour, per cent chances into 100 per cent 
capital and technology. Entrepreneur, success. They avoid situations with 
in response to a perceived business higher risks as they hate failure as 
opportunity mobilises these resources anyone would do; they dislike lower 
into a productive enterprise or risk situations as business ceases to 
firm.	 It	may	be	pointed	out	 that	 the	 be a game/fun! Risk as such more 
entrepreneur may not be possessing than a financial stake, becomes a 
any of these resources; he may just matter of personal stake, where less 
have the ‘idea’ that he promotes among than expected performance causes 
the resource providers. In an economy displeasure and distress.
with	a	well-developed	financial	system,	
he has to convince just the funding 9.9 intEllEctual propErty rightS 
institutions and with the capital so (ipr)
arranged he may enter into contracts Over the past two decades, intellectual 
of supply of equipment, materials, property rights have grown to a stature 
utilities (such as water and electricity) from where it plays a major role in 
and technology. What lies at the core the development of global economy. 
of organisation of production is the Intellectual property is everywhere, 
knowledge about availability and i.e., the music you listen to, the 
location of the resources as well as technology that makes your phone 
the optimum way to combine them. An work, the design of your favourite 
entrepreneur needs negotiation skills car, the logo on your sneakers, etc. It 
to raise these in the best interests of exists in all the things you can see—all 
the enterprise. are the products of human creativity 
(v) Risk-taking: It is generally believed and skill, such as inventions, books, 
that entrepreneurs take high risks. paintings, songs, symbols, names, 
Yes, individuals opting for a career images, or designs used in business, 
in entrepreneurship take a bigger etc. All inventions of creations begin 
risk that involved in a career in with an ‘idea’. Once the idea becomes 

2024-25

Chapter 9.indd   206 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM



MSME AND BUSINESS ENTREPRENEURSHIP 207

Startup India Scheme
The objective of Startup India Scheme is to build a strong ecosystem for nurturing 
innovation	and	startups	in	the	country.	The	scheme	specifically	aims	to:
 (i) trigger an entrepreneurial culture and inculcate entrepreneurial values in the 

society	at	large	and	influence	the	mindset	of	people	towards	entrepreneurship,
 (ii) create awareness about the charms of being an entrepreneur and the process 

of entrepreneurship.
 (iii) encourage more dynamic startups by motivating educated youth, scientists 

and technologists to consider entrepreneurship as a lucrative, preferred and 
viable career, and

	 (iv)	 Broad	base	the	entrepreneurial	supply	by	meeting	specific	needs	of	under	
represented target groups, like women, socially and economically backward 
communities, under represented regions to achieve inclusiveness and 
sustainable development to address the needs of the population at the bottom 
of the pyramid.

an actual product, i.e., Intellectual musical works, artistic works, such as 
Property, one can apply to the authority drawings, paintings, photographs and 
concerned under the Government sculptures and architectural designs.
of India for protection. Legal rights The most noticeable difference 
conferred on such products are called between intellectual property and other 
‘Intellectual Property Rights’ (IPR). forms of property is that intellectual 
Hence Intellectual property (IP) refers property is intangible, i.e., it cannot 
to products of human mind, hence, be	 defined	 or	 indentified	 by	 its	 own	
just like other types of property, the physical parameters. The scope and 
owners of IP can rent, give or sell it to definition	 of	 intellectual	 property	 is	
other people. constantly evolving with the inclusion 

Specifically,	 Intellectual	 property	 of newer forms. In recent times, 
(IP) refers to the creations of the geographical integrated circuits and 
human mind, like inventions, literary undisclosed indications, protection 
and artistic works, symbols, names, of plant varieties, information have 
images and designs used in business. been brought under the protection 

Intellectual property is divided of semi-conductors and umbrella of 
into two broad categories: industrial intellectual property. The following 
property, which includes inventions types of Intellectual Property Rights 
(patents), trademarks, industrial are recognised in India: Copyright, 
designs and geographical indications, Trademark, Geographical Indication, 
while the other is copyrights, which Patent,  Design, Plant Variety, 
includes literary and artistic works, Semiconductor Integrated Circuit 
such	as	novels,	 poems,	plays,	 films,	 Layout Design. In addition to this, 

2024-25

Chapter 9.indd   207 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM



208 BUSINESS  STUDIES

traditional knowledge also fall under 9.9.1 Why is IPR Important for 
IP. You must have often taken homely Entrepreneurs?
remedies passed on from your 
grandparents and great-grandparents It encourages creation of new, path-
as cure for an ailment. These homely breaking inventions, such as cancer 
remedies are traditional medicines cure medicines. It incentivises 
that have been practiced in India for inventors, authors, creators, etc., for 
past several centuries. They are also their work. It allows the work created 
known as ‘Traditional Knowledge’. by a person to be distributed and 
Some examples of Indian traditional communicated to the public only with 
medicinal systems are Ayurveda, his/her permission. Therefore, it helps 
Unani, Siddha and Yoga. Traditional in the prevention of loss of income. It 
Knowledge (TK) means the knowledge, helps authors, creators, developers 
systems, innovations and practices of and owners to get recognition for their 
local communities across the globe. works.
Such wisdom has been developed and 
accumulated over the years and has 
been used and passed down through 9.9.2 typES of ipS

several generations. A Traditional IPRs are extremely essential for 
Knowledge Digital Library (TKDL) fostering creativity and contribute 
has been developed by Government towards the economic growth of a 
of India, which is essentially a digital nation. Such rights allow creators 
knowledge repository of Traditional and inventors to have control over 
Knowledge that has existed in our their creations and inventions. These 
ancient civilization, especially about rights create incentives for artists, 
medicinal plants and formulations 
used in Indian systems of medicine. entrepreneurs and inventors to further 
This rich body of knowledge helps commit the necessary resources 
prevents wrongful patenting of our to research, develop, and market 
traditional knowledge. new technology and creative works. 

Another type of IP is Trade Secrets. The changing global economy is 
You must have heard about the creating unprecedented challenges 
popular beverage, Coca Cola. But and opportunities for continued 
do you know that the recipe of this progress in human development. There 
beverage is only known to three are business opportunities to market 
people in the whole world? This secret or sell IP worldwide. Geographical 
information is termed as a ‘Trade borders present no impediments—
Secret’. A trade secret is basically consumers enjoy near immediate 
any	 confidential	 information	which	 access to almost everything. At such 
provides a competitive edge. Trade exciting times, it is critical that we are 
secrets in India are protected under aware about the importance of IPRs 
the Indian Contract Act, 1872. and how it affects daily life. 

2024-25

Chapter 9.indd   208 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM



MSME AND BUSINESS ENTREPRENEURSHIP 209

Let’s understand each IP now. use of the content which includes 
Copyright reproducing and distributing copies of 
Copyright is the right to “not copy”. the subject matter. The unique feature 
It is offered when an original idea is of copyright is that, the protection of 
expressed by the creator or author. It work arises automatically as soon 
is a right conferred upon the creators as the work comes into existence. 
of literary, artistic, musical, sound The registration of the content is 
recording	 and	 cinematographic	 film.	 not mandatory but is essential to 
The copyright is an exclusive right of exercise exclusive rights in case of an 
the creator to prohibit the unauthorised infringement.

What is protected under Copyright?

Literary work Pamphlets, Brochures, Novels, Books, Poems, Song Lyrics, 
Computer Programme

Artistic work Drawings, Paintings, Sculpture, Architectural Drawings, 
Technical Drawings, Maps, Logos

Dramatic work Including Dance or Mime, Screenplay, Musical Work, Sound 
Recording,	Cinetographic	films

Trademark of deceptive similarity which may be 
A trademark is any word, name, or defined as phonetic, structural or 

visual similarity. Trademark may be 
symbol (or their combination) that categorised as Conventional and Non-
lets us identify the goods made by an Conventional trademark—
individual, company, organization, etc.  (i) Conventional Trademark: Words, 
Trademarks also let us differentiate colour combination, label, logo, 
the goods of one company from packaging, shape of goods, etc.
another. In a single brand or logo,  (ii) Non-Conventional Trademark: 
trademarks can let you know many Under this category those marks 
things about a company’s reputation, are considered which were not 
goodwill, products and services. A considered distinctive previously 
trademark helps in distinguishing but started getting recognition 
similar products in the market from with the passage of time, i.e., 
its competitors. A competitor cannot sound mark, dynamic mark, etc.
use the same, or similar trademark Besides these, smell and taste 
to sell their product in the market are also considered for protection 
as the same fall under the concept as trademarks, in some parts of the 

2024-25

Chapter 9.indd   209 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM



210 BUSINESS  STUDIES

world, but they are not recognised as to the geographical origin of products 
trademarks in India. The registration of and	accord	much	care	to	the	specific	
trademark is not mandatory under the characteristics present in the products 
Trademark Act 1999, but registration that they purchase. In some cases, 
of trademark helps establish exclusive there is a difference between “place of 
rights over the mark. To register origin” and “geographical indications” 
the mark you can visit http://www. which suggests to consumers, that the 
ipindia.nic.in which is the website of product will have a particular quality 
the Indian Trademark Registry. or characteristic, that they may value.

Geographical Indication Patent
A Geographical Indication (GI) is A patent is a type of IPR which protects 
primarily	an	indication	which	identifies	 the	scientific	inventions	(products	and	
agricultural, natural or manufactured or process) which shows technical 
products (handicrafts, industrial advancement over the already known 
goods and food stuffs) originating products. A ‘patent’ is an exclusive 
from	a	definite	geographical	territory,	 right granted by the Government 
where a given quality, reputation or which provides the exclusive ‘right to 
other characteristic are essentially exclude’ all others and prevent them 
attributable to its geographical origin. from making, using, offering for sale, 
GIs are part of our collective and selling or importing the invention.
intellectual heritage that need to For an invention to be patentable, 
be protected and promoted. Goods it must be new, non-obvious to any 
protected and registered as GI are person who is skilled in the relevant 
categorised into agricultural products, field	of	technology	and	must	be	capable	
natural, handicrafts, manufactured of industrial application.
goods and food stuffs. Naga Mircha,  (i) It must be new, i.e., it should 

not already exist in the current 
Mizo Chill i ,  Shaphee Lanphee, knowledge anywhere in the world.
Moirangphee and Chakhesang Shawl,  (ii) It must be non-obvious to any 
Bastar Dhokra, Warli Paintings, person who is skilled in the 
Darjeeling Tea, Kangra Painting, relevant	field	of	technology.	That	
Nagpur Orange, Banaras Brocades is, the standard is a person 
and Sarees, and Kashmir Pashmina reasonably	 skilled	 in	 such	 field	
are some of the examples of GIs. The of study (Inventive Step).
importance of GIs has increasingly  (iii) Finally, it must be capable of 
grown over the past few decades. GI industrial application, i.e., capable 
represents collective goodwill of a of being used or manufactured in 
geographical region, which has built the industry.
itself over centuries. Today, consumers Patent can only be filed to get 
are paying more and more attention rights over an invention and not 

2024-25

Chapter 9.indd   210 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM



MSME AND BUSINESS ENTREPRENEURSHIP 211

discovery. Newton saw the apple Patent creates a temporary 
fall and discovered gravity which is monopoly. Once the term of a patent 
considered to be a discovery.  On the expires, the invention is in public 
other hand, the father of telephone domain which means it is free for use 
Alexander Graham Bell invented by people. This prevents the patentee 
telephone. Thus when we use our from involving in anti-competitive 
ability to create something novel, or practices like creating monopoly, etc.
something unique into existence, it 
is called an invention, whereas the Design
process of highlighting the existence 
of an already existing thing is called A ‘design’ includes shape, pattern, 
discovery. and arrangement of lines or colour 

combination that is applied to any 
article. It is a protection given to 

What cannot be patented?
aesthetic appearance or eye-catching 

Scientific principles, contrary to features. The term of protection of a 
well established natural laws, 
formulation of abstract theory, design is valid for 10 years, which can 
frivolous inventions, prejudicial be renewed for further 5 years after 
to morality or injurious to public expiration of this term, during which 
health, method of agriculture or a registered design can only be used 
horticulture, method of treatment, after getting a license from its owner 
admixtures, traditional knowledge, and once the validity period is over, the 
incremental inventions without 
increase	in	efficacy	and	inventions	 design is in public domain.
related to atomic energy are some of 
the inventions not patentable under Plant Variety
Sections 3 and 4 of the Patents Act, 
1970. Plant Variety is essentially grouping 

plants into categories based on their 
botanical characteristics. It is a type 

The purpose of patent is to of variety which is bred and developed 
encourage	innovation	in	the	scientific	 by farmers. This helps in conserving, 
field.	A	patent	grants	exclusive	rights	 improving and making available 
to the inventor for a period of 20 
years, during which anybody else who plant genetic resources. For example, 
wishes to use the patented subject- hybrid versions of potatoes. Such 
matter needs to seek permission from protection promotes investment in 
the patentee, by paying certain costs R&D, recognizes Indian farmers as 
for the commercial use of such an cultivators, conservers and breeders 
invention. This process of seeking as well as facilitates high quality seeds 
exclusive rights of the patentee for a and planting material. This leads to the 
fee is called Licensing. growth of the seed industry.

2024-25

Chapter 9.indd   211 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM



212 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Semiconductor Integrated Circuits IP, not only on ethical grounds, but 
Layout Design also legal. After all, respect for others’ 
Have you ever seen a computer chip? IP begets respect for one’s IP. Start-
Are you aware of integrated circuits also up is an entrepreneurial venture that 
known as ‘ICs’? A semiconductor is an capitalises on developing, improving 
integral part of every computer chip. and innovating new products, processes 
Any product that contains transistors and services for the target audience. 
and other circuitry elements used and Start-ups today are responsible for 
formed on a semiconductor material, several disruptive technologies that 
as an insulating material, orinside the have changed the very way we think 
semiconductor material. Its design and live. With 20,000+ start-ups, India 
is to perform an electronic circuitry is said to have the third largest start-
function. up ecosystem in the world. The Start-

Whether a business is establishing up India initiative seeks to capture the 
its presence in the marketplace or is entrepreneurial streak in Indians, and 
already well-entrenched, protecting create a nation of job-creators, not job-
and managing its intellectual property seekers. Intellectual property rights 
is critical in taking the business ahead. can be critical in aiding new ventures 
Any business has to continuously monetise their ideas and establish 
innovate and think ahead, otherwise it competitiveness in the market by 
will simply stagnate and wither away. extending the protective umbrella 
It is equally essential to respect others’ offered by IPRs.

Key Terms

Small scale industries Cottage industries Tiny industries
Micro business industries Khadi industries Entrepreneurship

SUMMARY

Role of small business in India: Small Scale Industries play a very important 
role in the socio-economic development of the country. These industries 
account for 95 per cent of industrial units, contributing up to 40 per cent of the 
gross industrial value added and 45 per cent of the total exports. SSIs are the 
second largest employers of human resources, after agriculture and produce 
a variety of products for the economy. These units contribute to the balanced 
regional development of the country by using locally available material and 
indigenous technology. These provide ample scope for entrepreneurship; enjoy 
the advantage of low cost of production; quick decision making, and have 
quick adaptability and are best suited to customised production.

2024-25

Chapter 9.indd   212 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM



MSME AND BUSINESS ENTREPRENEURSHIP 213

Role of small business in rural India: Small business units provide multiple 
source of income, in wide range of non-agricultural activities and provide 
employment opportunities in rural areas, especially for the traditional artisan 
and weaker sections of the society.
Entrepreneur: The terms ‘entrepreneur,’ ‘entrepreneurship’ and ‘enterprises’ 
can be understood by drawing an analogy with the structure of a sentence in 
English language. Entrepreneur is the person (the subject), entrepreneurship 
is the process (the verb) and enterprise is the creation of the person and the 
output of the process (the object).

EXERCISES

Very Short Answer Questions
1. Which year the MSMED Act passed?
2. What is the micro enterprise.
3. What is a cottage industry?
4. What is meant by Village and Khadi Industry?
5. Give any two characteristics of entrepreneurship development.

Short Answer Questions
1. What is MSME?
2. State the meaning of entrepreneurship?
3. MSME and Entrepreneurship are connected. Do you agree. Give two 

reasons. 
4. State the role of MSME in development of a country? 
5. What are the different parameters used to measure the size of MSME?
6. State the meaning of Village and Khadi industries?
7. State any three major problems faced by MSMEs? 

Long Answer Questions
1. How do small scale industries contribute to the socio-economic development 

of india? Discuss
2. Describe the role of small business in rural India.
3. Discuss the problems faced by small scale industries.
4. What	measures	has	the	government	taken	to	solve	the	problem	of	finance	

and marketing in the small scale sector?
5. ‘Innovation is integral to MSME’. Discuss giving reasons to your answer. 
6. ‘Creativity and Innovation is the key to MSME’. Justify the statement. 

2024-25

Chapter 9.indd   213 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM



214 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Projects/Assignments
1. Prepare	a	profile	of	anyone	MSME	operating	locally	in	your	area.	Prepare	a	

questionnaire	to	find	out:	
 (a) The growth prospects of the unit.
 (b) Use of local resources and indigenous skills used.
 (c) The actual problems faced by an owner of a MSME. Prepare a project 

report on it.
 (d) Marketing of products and services

2. Find out the GI tag(s) for your sate. Prepare a chart showing its unique 
attributes. Discuss in the class how GI tag for the product has led to regional 
development. 

2024-25

Chapter 9.indd   214 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM