2 PHYSICAL FEATURES OF INDIA ou have already learnt earlier that India (1) The Himalayan Mountains Yis a vast country with varied land forms. (2) The Northern Plains What kind of terrain do you live in?  If (3) The Peninsular Plateau you live in the plains, you are familiar with the (4) The Indian Desert vast stretches of plain land. In contrast, if you (5) The Coastal Plains live in hilly region, the rugged terrain with (6) The Islands mountains and valleys are common features. In fact, our country has practically all major The Himalayan Mountains physical features of the earth, i.e., mountains, The Himalayas, geologically young and plains, deserts, plateaus and islands. structurally fold mountains stretch over the The land of India displays great physical northern borders of India. These mountain variation. Geologically, the Peninsular Plateau ranges run in a west-east direction from the constitutes one of the ancient landmasses on Indus to the Brahmaputra. The Himalayas the earth’s surface. It was supposed to be one represent the loftiest and one of the most of the most stable land blocks. The Himalayas rugged mountain barriers of the world. They and the Northern Plains are the most recent form an arc, which covers a distance of about landforms. From the view point of geology, 2,400 Km. Their width varies from 400 Km in Himalayan mountains form an unstable zone. Kashmir to 150 Km in Arunachal Pradesh. The The whole mountain system of Himalaya represents a very youthful topography with altitudinal variations are greater in the eastern high peaks, deep valleys and fast flowing rivers. half than those in the western half. The The northern plains are formed of alluvial Himalaya consists of three parallel ranges in deposits. The peninsular plateau is composed its longitudinal extent. A number of valleys lie of igneous and metamorphic rocks with gently between these ranges. The northern-most rising hills and wide valleys. range is known as the Great or Inner Himalayas or the Himadri. It is the most MAJOR PHYSIOGRAPHIC DIVISIONS continuous range consisting of the loftiest The physical  features of India can be grouped peaks with an average height of under the following physiographic divisions 6,000 metres. It contains all prominent (Figure 2.2): Himalayan peaks. 2024-25 Figure 2.1 : Himalayas Some Highest Peaks of the Himalayas The range lying to the south of the Peak Country Height Himadri forms the most rugged mountain in metres system and is known as Himachal or lesser Mt. Everest Nepal 8848 Himalaya. The ranges are mainly composed Kanchenjunga India 8598 Makalu Nepal 8481 of highly compressed and altered rocks. The Dhaulagiri Nepal 8172 altitude varies between 3,700 and 4,500 Nanga Parbat India 8126 metres and the average width is of 50 Km. Annapurna Nepal 8078 Nanda Devi India 7817 While the Pir Panjal range forms the longest Kamet India 7756 and the most important range, the Dhaula Namcha Barwa India 7756 Dhar and the Mahabharat ranges are also Gurla Mandhata Nepal 7728 prominent ones. This range consists of the The folds of the Great Himalayas are famous valley of Kashmir, the Kangra and asymmetrical in nature. The core of this part Kullu Valley in Himachal Pradesh. This of Himalayas is composed of granite. It is region is well-known for its hill stations. perennially snow bound, and a number of glaciers descend from this range. • Location of  Mussoorie, Nainital, Ranikhet from your atlas and also name the state where they are located. •  The names of the glaciers and passes that lie in the Great Himalayas. •   The  name of  the states where the highest The outer-most range of the Himalayas is peaks are located. called the Shiwaliks. They extend over a width 8 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I 2024-25 Figure 2.2 : Relief PHYSICAL FEATURES OF INDIA 9 2024-25 Figure 2.3 : The Himalayas of 10-50 Km and have an altitude varying categories. Find out some regional names of between 900 and 1100 metres. These ranges the Himalayas are composed of unconsolidated sediments The Brahmaputra marks the eastern-most brought down by rivers from the main boundary of the Himalayas. Beyond the Dihang Himalayan ranges located farther north. gorge, the Himalayas bend sharply to the south These valleys are covered with thick and spread along the eastern boundary of gravel and alluvium. The longitudinal valley India. They are known as the Purvachal or the lying between lesser Himalaya and the Eastern hills and mountains. These hills Shiwaliks are known as Duns. Dehra Dun, running through the north-eastern states are Kotli Dun and Patli Dun are some of the mostly composed of strong sandstones, which well-known Duns. are sedimentary rocks. Covered with dense Besides the longitudinal divisions, the forests, they mostly run as parallel ranges Himalayas have been divided on the basis of and valleys. The Purvachal comprises the regions from west to east. These divisions Patkai hills, the Naga hills, the Manipur hills have been demarcated by river valleys. For and the Mizo hills. example, the part of Himalayas lying between Indus and Satluj has been traditionally known as Punjab Himalaya but it is also known regionally as Kashmir and Himachal Himalaya from west to east respectively. The part of the Himalayas lying between Satluj and Kali rivers is known as Kumaon Himalayas. The Kali and Teesta rivers demarcate the Nepal Himalayas and the part lying between Teesta and Dihang rivers is known as Assam Himalayas. There are regional names also in these broad Figure 2.4 : Mizo Hills 10 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I 2024-25 The Northern Plain The Northern Plain is broadly divided into three sections. The Western part of the Northern The northern plain has been formed by the interplay of the three major river systems, Plain is referred to as the Punjab Plains. namely — the Indus, the Ganga and the Formed by the Indus and its tributaries, the larger part of this plain lies in Pakistan. The Brahmaputra along with their tributaries. This plain is formed of alluvial soil. The deposition Indus and its tributaries — the Jhelum, the of alluvium in a vast basin lying at the foothills Chenab, the Ravi, the Beas and the Satluj originate in the Himalaya. This section of the of the Himalaya over millions of years, formed this fertile plain. It spreads over an area of 7 plain is dominated by the doabs. lakh sq. km. The plain being about 2400 km long and 240 to 320 km broad, is a densely ‘Doab’ is made up of two words populated physiographic division. With a rich — ‘do’ meaning two and ‘ab’ meaning water.  Similarly ‘Punjab’, is also made up two words — ‘Punj’ meaning soil cover combined with adequate water five and ‘ab’ meaning water. supply and favourable climate it is agriculturally a productive part of India. The Ganga plain extends between Ghaggar and Teesta rivers.  It is spread over North India in Haryana, Delhi, U.P., Bihar, partly Jharkhand and West Bengal. In the East, particularly in Assam lies the Brahmaputra plain. The northern plains are generally described as flat land with no variations in its relief. It is not true. These vast plains also have diverse relief features. According to the variations in relief features, the Northern plains can be divided into four regions. The rivers, after descending from the mountains deposit pebbles in a narrow belt of about 8 to 16 km in width lying parallel to the slopes of the Figure 2.5 : The Northern Plains Shiwaliks. It is known as bhabar. All the streams disappear in this bhabar belt. South The rivers coming from northern of this belt, the streams and rivers re-emerge mountains are involved in depositional work. and create a wet, swampy and marshy region In the lower course, due to gentle slope, the known as terai. This was a thickly forested velocity of the river decreases, which results in region full of wildlife. The forests have been the formation of riverine islands. cleared to create agricultural land and to settle migrants from Pakistan after partition.  Locate Dudhwa National Park in this region. Majuli, in the Brahmaputra river, is the largest inhabited riverine island in the The largest part of the northern plain is world. formed of older alluvium. It lies above the floodplains of the rivers and presents a terraceThe rivers in their lower course split into like feature. This part is known as bhangar. numerous channels due to the deposition of silt. The soil in this region contains calcareous These channels are known as distributaries. deposits, locally known as kankar. The PHYSICAL FEATURES OF INDIA 11 2024-25 newer, younger deposits of the floodplains The  Chotanagpur plateau marks the are called khadar. They are renewed almost further eastward extension, drained by the every year and so are fertile, thus, ideal for Damodar river. intensive agriculture. The Deccan Plateau is a triangular landmass that lies to the south of the river Narmada. The The Peninsular Plateau Satpura range flanks its broad base in the north, The Peninsular plateau  is a tableland while the Mahadev, the Kaimur hills and the composed of the old crystalline, igneous and Maikal range form its eastern extensions. Locate metamorphic rocks. It was formed due to the these hills and ranges in the Physical map of breaking and drifting of the Gondwana land India. The Deccan Plateau is higher in the west and thus, making it a part of the oldest and slopes gently eastwards. An extension of the landmass. The plateau has broad and shallow Plateau is also visible in the northeast, locally valleys and rounded hills. This plateau consists known as the Meghalaya, Karbi-Anglong Plateau of two broad divisions, namely, the Central and North Cachar Hills. It is separated by a fault Highlands and the Deccan Plateau. The part from the Chotanagpur Plateau. Three prominent of the Peninsular plateau lying to the north of hill ranges from the west to the east are the Garo, the Narmada river, covering a major area of the the Khasi and the Jaintia Hills. Malwa plateau, is known as the Central The Western Ghats and the Eastern Ghats Highlands. The Vindhyan range is bounded mark the western and the eastern edges of the by the Satpura range on the south and the Deccan Plateau respectively. Western Ghats lie Aravalis on the northwest. The further parallel to the western coast. They are continuous westward extension gradually merges with the and can be crossed through passes only. Locate sandy and rocky desert of Rajasthan. The the Thal, Bhor and Pal Ghats in the Physical flow of the rivers draining this region, namely map of India. the Chambal, the Sind, the Betwa and the Ken The Western Ghats are higher than the is from southwest to northeast, thus indicating Eastern Ghats. Their average elevation is 900– the slope. The Central Highlands are wider in 1600 metres as against 600 metres of the the west but narrower in the east. The eastward Eastern Ghats. The Eastern Ghats stretch extensions of this plateau are locally known from the Mahanadi Valley to the Nigiris in the as the Bundelkhand and Baghelkhand. south.  The Eastern Ghats are discontinuous and irregular and dissected by rivers draining into the Bay of Bengal. The Western Ghats cause orographic rain by facing the rain bearing moist winds to rise along the western slopes of the Ghats. The Western Ghats are known by different local names. The height of the Western Ghats progressively increases from north to south. The highest peaks include the Anai Mudi (2,695 metres) and the Doda Betta (2,637 metres). Mahendragiri (1,501 metres) is the highest peak in the Eastern Ghats. Shevroy Hills and the Javadi Figure 2.6 : A Waterfall in Chotanagpur Plateau Hills are located to the southeast of the 12 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I 2024-25 Eastern Ghats. Locate the famous hill stations more prominent near the Indo-Pakistan of Udagamandalam, popularly known as boundary. If you visit Jaisalmer, you may go Ooty and the Kodaikanal. to see a group of barchans. One of the distinct features of the Peninsular plateau is the black soil area The Coastal Plains known as Decean Trap. This is of volcanic The Peninsular plateau is flanked by stretch origin, hence, the rocks are igneous. Actually, of narrow coastal strips, running along the these rocks have denuded over time and are Arabian Sea on the west and the Bay of Bengal responsible for the formation of black soil. The on the east. The western coast, sandwiched Aravali Hills lie on the western and between the Western Ghats and the Arabian northwestern margins of the Peninsular Sea, is a narrow plain. It consists of three plateau. These are highly eroded hills and are sections. The northern part of the coast is called found as broken hills. They extend from the Konkan (Mumbai – Goa), the central stretch Gujarat to Delhi in a southwest-northeast is called the Kannad Plain, while the southern direction. stretch is referred to as the Malabar coast. The Indian Desert The Indian desert lies towards the western margins of the Aravali Hills. It is an undulating sandy plain covered with sand dunes. This region receives very low rainfall below 150 mm per year. It has arid climate with low vegetation cover. Streams appear during the rainy season. Soon after they disappear into the sand as they do not have enough water to reach the sea.  Luni is the only large river in this region. Figure 2.8 : The Coastal Plains The plains along the Bay of Bengal are wide and level. In the northern part, it is referred to as the Northern Circar, while the southern part is known as the Coromandel Coast. Large rivers, such as the Mahanadi, the Godavari, the Krishna and the Kaveri have formed extensive delta  on this coast. Lake Chilika is an important feature along the eastern coast. Figure 2.7 : The Indian Desert The Chilika Lake is the Barchans (crescent-shaped dunes) cover largest salt water lake in India. It lies in the state larger areas but longitudinal dunes become of Odisha, to the south of the Mahanadi delta. PHYSICAL FEATURES OF INDIA 13 2024-25 The Islands Now you see the elongated chain of islands You have already seen that India has a vast located in the Bay of Bengal extending from mainland. Besides this, the country has two groups north to south. These are Andaman and of islands. Can you identify these island groups? Nicobar islands. They are bigger in size and are more numerous and scattered. The entire group of islands is divided into two broad categories –  The Andaman in the north and the Nicobar in the south. It is believed that these islands are an elevated portion of submarine mountains.  These island groups are of great strategic importance for the country.  There is great diversity of flora and fauna in this group of islands too. These islands lie close to equator and experience equatorial climate and has thick forest cover. Figure 2.9 : An Island Locate the Lakshadweep Islands group India’s only active volcano is lying close to the Malabar coast of Kerala. This found on Barren island in Andaman and Nicobar group of Islands. group of islands is composed of small coral isalnds. Earlier they were known as Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindive. In 1973, these were A detailed account of the different named as Lakshadweep. It covers small area physiographic units highlights the unique of 32 sq km. Kavaratti island is the features of each region.  It would, however, administrative headquarters of Lakshadweep. be clear that each region complements the This island group has great diversity of flora other and makes the country richer in its and fauna. The Pitti island, which is natural resources.  The mountains are the uninhabited, has a bird sanctuary. major sources of water and forest wealth. The northern plains are the granaries of the Corals country. They provide the base for early Coral polyps are short-lived microscopic civilisations.  The plateau is a storehouse organisms, which live in colonies. They flourish of minerals, which has played a crucial role in shallow, mud-free and warm waters.  They secrete calcium carbonate.  The coral secretion in the industrialisation of the country.  The and their skeletons from coral deposits in the coastal region and island groups provide form of reefs: they are mainly of three kinds: sites for fishing and port activities.  Thus, barrier reef. fringing reef and atolls.  The Great Barrier Reef of Australia is a good example of the the diverse physical features of the land first kind of coral reefs. Atolls are circular or have immense future possibi l i t ies horse shoe-shaped coral reefs. of development. 14 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I 2024-25 EXERCISE 1. Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below. (i) A landmass bounded by sea on three sides is referred to as (a) Coast (c) Peninsula (b) Island (d) None of the above (ii) Mountain ranges in the eastern part of India forming its boundary with Myanmar are collectively called (a) Himachal (c) Purvachal (b) Uttarakhand (d) None of the above (iii) The western coastal strip, south of Goa is referred to as (a) Coromandel (c) Kannad (b) Konkan (d) Northern Circar (iv) The highest peak in the Eastern Ghats is (a) Anai Mudi (c) Mahendragiri (b) Kanchenjunga (d) Khasi 2 Answer the following questions briefly. (i) What is the bhabar? (ii) Name the three major divisions of the Himalayas from north to south. (iii) Which plateau lies between the Aravali and the Vindhyan ranges? (iv) Name the island group of India having coral origin. 3. Distinguish between (i) Bhangar and Khadar (ii) Western Ghats and Eastern Ghats 4. Which are the major physiographic divisions of India?  Contrast the relief of the Himalayan region with that of the Peninsular plateau. 5. Give an account of the Northern Plains of India. 6. Write short notes on the following. (i) The Indian Desert (ii) The Central Highlands (iii) The Island groups of India MAP SKILLS On an outline map of India show the following. (i) Mountain and hill ranges – the Karakoram, the Zaskar, the Patkai Bum, the Jaintia, the Vindhya range, the Aravali, and the Cardamom hills. (ii) Peaks – K2, Kanchenjunga, Nanga Parbat and the Anai Mudi. (iii) Plateaus, Chotanagpur and Malwa (iv) The Indian Desert, Western Ghats, Lakshadweep Islands PHYSICAL FEATURES OF INDIA 15 2024-25 PROJECT/ACTIVITY Locate the peaks, passes, ranges, plateaus, hills, and duns hidden in the puzzle. Try to find where these features are located.  You may start your search horizontally, vertically or diagonally. 16 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I 2024-25