1 INDIA – SIZE AND LOCATION ndia is one of the ancient civilisations in the The Tropic of Cancer (23° 30'N) divides the Iworld.  It has achieved multi-faceted socio- country into almost two equal parts. To the economic progress during the last five southeast and southwest of the mainland, lie decades.  It has moved forward displaying the Andaman and Nicobar islands and the remarkable progress in the field of Lakshadweep islands in Bay of Bengal and agriculture, industry, technology and overall Arabian Sea respectively.  Find out the extent economic development.  India has also of these groups of islands from your atlas. contributed significantly to the making of world  history. • The southernmost point of the Indian Union– ‘Indira Point’ got submerged under the sea water in 2004 during the Tsunami. LOCATION India is a vast country. Lying entirely in the SIZE Northern hemisphere (Figure 1.1) the main The land mass of India has an area of 3.28 land extends between latitudes 8°4'N and million square km. India’s total area accounts 37°6'N and longitudes 68°7'E and 97°25'E. for about 2.4 per cent of the total geographical 180°W 150° 120° 90° 60° 30°W 0° 30°E 60° 90° 120° 150° 180°E 75°N 60° North America Europe 45° Asia 30° PACIFIC ATLANTIC Africa PACIFIC 15°N OCEAN OCEAN OCEAN 0° South INDIAN America OCEAN 15°S Australia 30° 45° 60° Antartica 75°S Figure 1.1 : India in the World 2024-25 area of the world. From Figure 1.2 it is clear that India is the seventh largest country of • Why 82°30'E has been selected as the Standard the world. India has a land boundary of Meridian of India? about 15,200 km and the total length of the • Why is the difference between the durations coastline of the mainland, including of day and night hardly felt at Kanniyakumari Andaman and Nicobar and Lakshadweep, but not so in Kashmir? is 7,516.6 km. India is bounded by the young fold INDIA AND THE WORLD mountains in the northwest,  north and The Indian landmass has a central location northeast. South of about 22° north between the East and the West Asia. India is a latitude, it begins to taper, and extends southward extension of the Asian continent. The towards the Indian Ocean, dividing it into trans Indian Ocean routes, which connect the two seas, the Arabian Sea on the west and countries of Europe in the West and the the Bay of  Bengal on its east. countries of  East Asia, provide a strategic central Look at Figure 1.3 and note that the location to India. Note that the Deccan Peninsula latitudinal and longitudinal extent of the protrudes into the Indian Ocean, thus helping mainland is about 30°. Despite this fact, the India to establish close contact with West Asia, east-west extent appears to be smaller than Africa and Europe from the western coast and the north-south extent. with Southeast and East Asia from the eastern From Gujarat to Arunachal Pradesh, coast. No other country has a long coastline on there is a time lag of two hours. Hence, time the Indian Ocean as India has and indeed, it is along the Standard Meridian of India India’s eminent position in the Indian Ocean, (82°30'E) passing through Mirzapur (in which justifies the naming of an Ocean after it. Uttar Pradesh) is taken as the standard time for the whole country. The latitudinal extent Since the opening of the influences the duration of day and night, as Suez Canal in 1869, India’s distance from Europe one moves from south to north. has been reduced by 7,000 km. Source : United Nations Demographic Year Book 2015 Figure 1.2 : Seven Largest Countries of the World 2 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I 2024-25 Figure 1.3 : India : Extent and Standard Meridian INDIA – SIZE AND LOCATION 3 2024-25 Figure 1.4 : India on International Highway of Trade and Commerce India’s contacts with the World have continued through ages but her relationships •  The number of Union Territories along the western and eastern coasts. through the land routes are much older than •  Area-wise which is the smallest and which is her maritime contacts. The various passes across the largest state? the mountains in the north have provided •  The states which do not have an international passages to the ancient travellers, while the border or lie on the coast. oceans restricted such interaction for a long time. •  Classify the states into four groups each These routes have contributed in the having common frontiers with (i) Pakistan, (ii) China, (iii) Myanmar, and exchange of ideas and commodities since (iv) Bangladesh. ancient times. The ideas of the Upanishads and the Ramayana, the stories of Panchtantra, India shares its land boundaries with the Indian numerals and the decimal system Pakistan and Afghanistan in the northwest, thus could reach many parts of the world. The China (Tibet), Nepal and Bhutan in the north spices, muslin and other merchandise were and Myanmar and Bangladesh in the east. taken from India to different countries. On the Our southern neighbours across the sea other hand, the influence of Greek sculpture, consist of the two island countries, namely and the architectural styles of dome and minarets from West Asia can be seen in different parts of our country. Before 1947, there were two types of states in India — the provinces and the INDIA’S NEIGHBOURS Princely states.  Provinces were ruled directly by British officials, who were appointed by the India occupies an important strategic position Viceroy. Princely states were ruled by local, in South Asia. India has 28 states and Eight hereditary rulers, who acknowledged sovereignity Union Territories (Figure 1.5). in return for local autonomy. 4 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I 2024-25 Figure 1.5 : India and Adjacent Countries Sri Lanka and Maldives. Sri Lanka is India has had strong geographical and separated from India by a narrow channel historical links with her neighbours. Look of sea formed by the Palk Strait and the Gulf at the physical map of Asia in your atlas, of Mannar, while Maldives Islands are situated and note how India stands apart from the to the south of the Lakshadweep Islands. rest of Asia. School Bhuvan, NCERT is a portal providing map-based learning to bring awareness among the students about the country’s natural resources, environment and their role in sustainable development. It is an initiative of Bhuvan — NRSC/ISRO based on NCERT syllabus. You can explore various maps of India related to the secondary stage on https://bhuvan-app1.nrsc.gov.in/mhrd_ncert/ INDIA – SIZE AND LOCATION 5 2024-25 EXERCISE 1. Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below. (i) The Tropic of Cancer does  not pass  through (a) Rajasthan (c) Chhattisgarh (b) Odisha (d) Tripura (ii) The easternmost longitude  of India is (a) 97° 25' E (c)  77° 6' E (b) 68° 7' E (d)  82° 32' E (iii) Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal and Sikkim have common frontiers with (a) China (c) Nepal (b) Bhutan (d) Myanmar (iv) If you intend to visit Kavarati during your summer vacations, which one of the following Union Territories of India you will be going to (a) Puducherry (c) Andaman and Nicobar (b) Lakshadweep (d) Daman and Diu (v) My friend hails from a country which does not share land boundary with India. Identify the country. (a) Bhutan (c) Bangladesh (b) Tajikistan (d) Nepal 2 Answer the following questions briefly. (i) Name the group of islands lying in the Arabian Sea. (ii) Name the countries which are larger than India. (iii) Which island group of India lies to its south-east? (iv) Which island countries are our southern neighbours? 3 The sun rises two hours earlier in Arunachal Pradesh as compared to Gujarat in the west but the watches show the same time. How does this happen? 4 The central location of India at the head of the Indian Ocean is considered of great significance. Why? MAP SKILLS 1. Identify the following with the help of map reading. (i) The island groups of India lying in the Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal. (ii) The countries constituting Indian subcontinent. (iii) The States through which the Tropic of Cancer passes. (iv) The northernmost latitude in degrees. (v) The southernmost latitude of the Indian mainland in degrees. (vi) The eastern and the western-most longitude in degrees. (vii) The place situated on the three seas. (viii) The strait separating Sri Lanka from India. (ix) The Union Territories of India. PROJECT/ACTIVITY (i) Find out the longitudinal and latitudinal extent of your state. (ii) Collect information about the ‘Silk Route’. Also find out the new developments, which are improving communication routes in the regions of high altitude. 6 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I 2024-25