Haban comes to Guwahati with his father A bright smile from toothpaste from a remote village. and minerals He sees people getting into strange Toothpaste cleans your teeth. Abrasive house like objects which move along the minerals like silica, limestone, aluminium road. He also sees a “kitchen” dragging a oxide and various phosphate minerals do the number of house along with it. He is amazed cleaning. Fluoride which is used to reduce and asked his father “Why don’t our houses cavities, comes from a mineral fluorite. Most move like the one we saw in Guwahati, Ba?” toothpaste are made white with titanium Ba replies, “These are not houses, they oxide, which comes from minerals called are buses and trains. Unlike our houses these rutile, ilmenite and anatase. The sparkle in are not made of bricks and stones, metal like some  toothpastes comes from mica. The iron and alluminium are used in making toothbrush and tube containing the paste are these. They do not move on their own. They made of plastics from petroleum.  Find out are driven by an engine which needs energy where these minerals are found? to work.” Dig a little deeper and find out how many We use different things in our daily life made minerals are used to make a light bulb? from metal. Can you list a number of items used in your house made of metals. Where do All living things need minerals these metals come from? You have studied that the earth’s crust is Life processes cannot occur without minerals. made up of different minerals embedded in the Although our mineral intake represents only rocks. Various metals are extracted from these about 0.3 per cent of our total intake of minerals after proper refinement. nutrients, they are so potent and so important Minerals are an indispensable part of our that without them we would not be able to lives. Almost everything we use, from a tiny pin utilise the other 99.7 per cent of foodstuffs. to a towering building or a big ship, all are made from minerals. The railway lines and the Dig a little deeper and collect “Nutritional tarmac (paving) of the roads, our implements Facts” printed on food labels. and machinery too are made from minerals. Cars, buses, trains, aeroplanes are What is a mineral? manufactured from minerals and run on Geologists define mineral as a power resources derived from the earth. Even “homogenous, natura lly occurring substance the food that we eat contains minerals. In all with a definable internal structure.” Minerals stages of development, human beings have are found in varied forms in nature, ranging used minerals for their livelihood, decoration, from the hardest diamond to the softest talc. festivities, religious and ceremonial rites. Why are they so varied? Reprint 2024-25 You have already learnt about rocks. sufficient concentration to make its extraction Rocks are combinations of homogenous commercially viable. The type of formation or substances called minerals. Some rocks, for structure in which they are found determines instance limestone, consist of a single mineral the relative ease with which mineral ores may only, but majority of the rock consist of several be mined. This also determines the cost of minerals in varying proportions. Although, extraction. It is, therefore, important for us over 2000 minerals have been identified, only to understand the main types of formations a few are abundantly found in most of the in which minerals occur. rocks. Minerals generally occur in these forms: A particular mineral that will be formed (i) In igneous and metamorphic rocks from a certain combination of elements minerals may occur in the cracks, depends upon the physical and chemical crevices, faults or joints. The smaller conditions under which the material forms. occurrences are called veins and the This, in turn, results in a wide range of colours, larger are called lodes. In most cases, hardness, crystal forms, lustre and density that they are formed when minerals in liquid/ a particular mineral possesses. Geologists use molten and gaseous forms are forced these properties to classify the minerals. upward through cavities towards the earth’s surface. They cool and solidify as Study of Minerals by Geographers they rise. Major metallic minerals like tin, and Geologists copper, zinc and lead etc. are obtained Geographers study minerals as part of the from veins and lodes. earth’s crust for a better understanding of (ii) In sedimentary rocks a number of minerals landforms. The distribution of mineral occur in beds or layers. They have been resources and associated  economic activities formed as a result of deposition, are of interest to geographers. A geologist, accumulation and concentration in however, is interested in the formation of horizontal strata. Coal and some forms of minerals, their age and physical and iron ore have been concentrated as a result chemical composition. of long periods under great heat and pressure. Another group of sedimentary However, for general and commercial minerals include gypsum, potash salt and purposes minerals can be classified as under. sodium salt. These are formed as a result of evaporation especially in arid regions. MODE OF OCCURRENCE OF MINERALS (iii) Another mode of formation involves the Where are these minerals found? decomposition of surface rocks, and the Minerals are usually found in “ores”. The removal of soluble constituents, leaving term ore is used to describe an accumulation a residual mass of weathered of any mineral mixed with other elements. material containing ores. Bauxite is The mineral content of the ore must be in formed this way. Fig. 5.1 MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES 43 Reprint 2024-25 (iv) Certain minerals may occur as alluvial non-ferrous minerals. The vast alluvial plains deposits in sands of valley floors and the of north India are almost devoid of economic base of hills. These deposits are called minerals. These variations exist largely because ‘placer deposits’ and generally contain of the differences in the geological structure, minerals, which are not corroded by water. processes and time involved in the formation Gold, silver, tin and platinum are most of minerals. important among such minerals. Let us now study the distribution of a few (v) The ocean waters contain vast quantities major minerals in India. Always remember that of minerals, but most of these are too widely the concentration of mineral in the ore, the ease diffused to be of economic significance. of extraction and closeness to the market play However, common salt, magnesium and an important role in affecting the economic bromine are largely derived from ocean viability of a reserve. Thus, to meet the demand, waters. The ocean beds, too, are rich in a choice has to be made between a number of manganese nodules. possible options. When this is done a mineral ‘deposit’ or ‘reserve’ turns into a mine. Ferrous Minerals Rat-Hole Mining. Do you know that most Ferrous minerals account for about threeof the minerals in India are nationalised fourths of the total value of the production of and their extraction is possible only after metallic minerals. They provide a strong base obtaining due permission from the for the development of metallurgical industries. government? But in most of the tribal India exports substantial quantities of ferrous areas of the north-east India, minerals are minerals after meeting her internal demands. owned by individuals or communities. In Meghalaya, there are large deposits of coal, Iron Ore iron ore, limestone and dolomite etc. Coal Iron ore is the basic mineral and the backbone mining in Jowai and Cherapunjee is done of industrial development. India is endowed by family member in the form of a long with fairly abundant resources of iron ore. India narrow tunnel, known as ‘Rat hole’ is rich in good quality iron ores. Magnetite is mining. The National Green Tribunal has the finest iron ore with a very high content of declared such activities illegal and iron up to 70 per cent. It has excellent magnetic recommended that these should be qualities, especially valuable in the electrical stopped forthwith. industry. Hematite ore is the most important industrial iron ore in terms of the quantity Dig a little deeper: What is the difference used, but has a slightly lower iron content than between an open pit mine, a quarry and an magnetite. (50-60 per cent). In 2018–19 almost underground mine with shafts? entire production of iron ore (97%) accrued from Odisha, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka and India is fortunate to have fairly rich and Jharkhand. The remaining production (3%) varied mineral resources. However, these are was from other states. unevenly distributed. Broadly speaking, peninsular rocks contain most of the reserves of coal, metallic minerals, mica and many other Kudre in Kannada means horse. The non-metallic minerals. Sedimentary rocks on highest peak in the western ghats of the western and eastern flanks of the peninsula, Karnataka resembles the face of a horse. in Gujarat and Assam have most of the The Bailadila hills look like the hump of petroleum deposits. Rajasthan with the rock an ox, and hence its name. systems of the peninsula, has reserves of many 44 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II Reprint 2024-25 Maharashtra. Though, the ores are not of very high quality, yet they are efficiently exploited. Iron ore is exported through Marmagao port. Manganese Manganese is mainly used in the manufacturing of steel and ferro-manganese alloy. Nearly 10 kg of manganese is required to manufacture one tonne of steel. It is also used in manufacturing bleaching powder, insecticides and paints. Andhra Others Pradesh 2% 10% Fig. 5.2:  Iron ore mine Karnataka The major iron ore belts in India are: 12% • Odisha-Jharkhand belt: In Odisha high Madhya Pradesh grade hematite ore is found in Badampahar 33% mines in the Mayurbhanj and Kendujhar districts. In the adjoining Singbhum Odisha district of Jharkhand haematite iron ore is 16% mined in Gua and Noamundi. • Durg-Bastar-Chandrapur belt lies in Chhattisgarh and Maharashtra. Very high grade hematites are found in the famous Maharashtra Bailadila range of hills in the Bastar district 27% of Chhattisgarh. The range of hills Fig. 5.3:  Production of Manganese showing comprise of 14 deposits of super high state-wise share in per cent, 2018–19 grade hematite iron ore. It has the best physical properties needed for steel Dig a little deeper: Superimpose the maps making. Iron ore from these mines is showing distribution of iron ore, manganese, exported to Japan and South Korea via coal and iron and steel industry. Do you see Vishakhapatnam port. any correlation. Why? • Ballari-Chitradurga-ChikkamagaluruTumakuru belt in Karnataka has large reserves of iron ore. The Kudremukh mines Non-Ferrous Minerals located in the Western Ghats of Karnataka India’s reserves and production of nonare a 100 per cent export unit. Kudremukh ferrous minerals is not very satisfactory. deposits are known to be one of the largest However, these minerals, which include in the world. The ore is transported as copper, bauxite, lead, zinc and gold play a slurry through a pipeline to a port near vital role in a number of metallurgical, Mangaluru. engineering and electrical industries. Let us • Maharashtra-Goa belt includes the state study the distribution of copper and of Goa and Ratnagiri district of bauxite. MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES 45 Reprint 2024-25 India:  Distribution of Iron Ore, Manganese, Bauxite and Mica 46 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II Reprint 2024-25 Copper Madhya India is critically deficient in the reserve and Maharashtra Pradesh Others 6% 3% production of copper. Being malleable, ductile 1% and a good conductor, copper is mainly used Chhattisgarh 6% in electrical cables, electronics  and chemical Gujarat 9% Odisha 65% Jharkhand 10% Fig. 5.5:  Production of Bauxite showing state-wise Fig. 5.4:  Copper mines at Malanjkhand share in per cent, 2018–19 industries. The Balaghat mines in Madhya Odisha was the largest bauxite producing Pradesh, Khetri mines in Rajasthan and state in India in 2016-17. Panchpatmali Singhbhum district of Jharkhand are leading deposits in Koraput district are the most producers of copper. important bauxite deposits in the state. Bauxite Though, several ores contain aluminium, it is from bauxite, a clay-like substance that alumina and later aluminium is obtained. Bauxite deposits are formed by the decomposition of a wide variety of rocks rich in aluminium silicates. Aluminium is an important metal because it combines the strength of metals such as iron, with extreme lightness and also with good conductivity and great malleability. India’s bauxite deposits are mainly Fig.5.6:  Bauxite Mine found in the Amarkantak plateau, Maikal hills and the Dig a little deeper: Locate the mines of plateau region of Bilaspur-Katni. Bauxite on the physical map of India. MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES 47 Reprint 2024-25 Rock Minerals Limestone is found in association with rocks After the discovery of aluminium composed of calcium carbonates or calcium Emperor Napoleon III wore buttons and and magnesium carbonates. It is found in hooks on his clothes made of aluminium sedimentary rocks of most geological and served food to his more illustrious formations. Limestone is the basic raw guests in aluminium utensils and the material for the cement industry and less honourable ones were served in gold essential for smelting iron ore in the blast and silver utensils. Thirty years after this furnace. incident aluminium bowls were most common with the beggars in Paris. Dig a little deeper: Study the maps to explain why Chota Nagpur is a storehouse of minerals. Non-Metallic Minerals Mica is a mineral made up of a series of plates or leaves. It splits easily into thin sheets. These sheets can be so thin that a thousand can be layered into a mica sheet of a few centimeters high. Mica can be clear, black, green, red yellow or brown. Due to its excellent di-electric strength, low power loss factor, insulating properties and resistance to high voltage, mica is one of the most indispensable minerals used in electric and electronic industries. Mica deposits are found in the northern edge of the Chota Nagpur plateau. Koderma Gaya – Hazaribagh belt of Jharkhand is the leading producer. In Rajasthan, the major mica producing Fig. 5.7:  Production of Limestone showing area is around Ajmer. Nellore mica belt of state-wise share in per cent, 2018–19 Andhra Pradesh is also an important producer in the country. Hazards of Mining Have you ever wondered about the efforts the miners make in making life comfortable for you? What are the impacts of mining on the health of the miners and the environment? The dust and noxious fumes inhaled by miners make them vulnerable to pulmonary diseases. The risk of collapsing mine roofs, inundation and fires in coalmines are a constant threat to miners. The water sources in the region get contaminated due to mining. Dumping of waste and slurry leads to degradation of land, soil, Fig. 5.8:  Air pollution due to and increase in stream and river pollution. generation of dust in mining areas 48 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II Reprint 2024-25 Stricter safety regulations and required millions of years to be created and implementation of environmental laws are concentrated. The geological processes of essential to prevent mining from becoming a mineral formation are so slow that the rates “killer industry”. of replenishment are infinitely small in comparison to the present rates of CONSERVATION OF MINERALS consumption. Mineral resources are, We all appreciate the strong dependence of therefore, finite and non-renewable. Rich industry and agriculture upon mineral mineral deposits are our country’s extremely deposits and the substances manufactured valuable but short-lived possessions. from them. The total volume of workable Continued extraction of ores leads to mineral deposits is an insignificant fraction increasing costs as mineral extraction comes i.e. one per cent of the earth’s crust. We are from greater depths along with decrease rapidly consuming mineral resources that in quality. MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES 49 Reprint 2024-25 A concerted effort has to be made in order to use our mineral resources in a planned and sustainable manner. Improved technologies need to be constantly evolved to allow use of low grade ores at low costs. Recycling of metals, using scrap metals and other substitutes are steps in conserving our mineral resources for the future. Dig a little deeper: Make a list of items where substitutes  are being used instead of minerals. Where are these substitutes obtained from? Energy Resources Fig. 5.9 (a):  A view from inside of a coal mine Energy is required for all activities. It is needed to cook, to provide light and heat, to propel vehicles and to drive machinery in industries. Energy can be generated from fuel minerals like coal, petroleum, natural gas, uranium and from electricity. Energy resources can be classified as conventional and non-conventional sources. Conventional sources include: firewood, cattle dung cake, coal, petroleum, natural gas and electricity (both hydel and thermal). Non-conventional sources include solar, wind, tidal, geothermal, biogas and atomic energy. Firewood and cattle dung cake are most common in rural India. Fig. 5.9 (b):  A view from outside of a coal mine According to one estimate more than 70 per cent energy requirement in rural households time of burial. Decaying plants in swamps is met by these two ; continuation of these is produce peat. Which has a low carbon and increasingly becoming dif ficult due to high moisture contents and low heating decreasing forest area. Moreover, using dung capacity. Lignite is a low grade brown coal, cake too is being discouraged because it which is soft with high moisture content. The consumes most valuable manure which could principal lignite reserves are in Neyveli in Tamil be used in agriculture. Nadu and are used for generation of electricity. Coal that has been buried deep Conventional Sources of Energy and subjected to increased temperatures is Coal: In India, coal is the most abundantly bituminous coal. It is the most popular coal available fossil fuel. It provides a substantial in commercial use. Metallurgical coal is high part of the nation’s energy needs. It is used grade bituminous coal which has a special for power generation, to supply energy to value for smelting iron in blast furnaces. industry as well as for domestic needs. India Anthracite is the highest quality hard coal. is highly dependent on coal for meeting its In India coal occurs in rock series of two commercial energy requirements. main geological ages, namely Gondwana, a As you are already aware that coal is little over 200 million years in age and in formed due the compression of plant material tertiary deposits which are only about 55 over millions of years. Coal, therefore, is million years old. The major resources of found in a variety of forms depending on the Gondwana coal, which are metallurgical coal, degrees of compression and the depth and are located in Damodar valley (West Bengal50 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II Reprint 2024-25 India:  Distribution of Coal, Oil and Natural Gas Collect information about cross country natural gas pipelines laid by GAIL (India) under “One Nation One Grid”. MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES 51 Reprint 2024-25 Jharkhand). Jharia, Raniganj, Bokaro are gas distribution (COD) networks, natural gas important coalfields. The Godavari, is also emerging as a preferred transport fuel Mahanadi, Son and Wardha valleys also (CNG) and cooking fuel (PNG) at homes. India’s contain coal deposits. major gas reserves are found in the Mumbai Tertiary coals occur in the north eastern High and allied fields along the west coast states of Meghalaya, Assam, Arunachal which are supplemented by finds in the Pradesh and Nagaland. Cambay basin. Along the East Coast, new Remember coal is a bulky material, which reserves of natural gas have been discovered loses weight on use as it is reduced to ash. in the Krishna-Godavari basin. Hence, heavy industries and thermal power The first 1,700 km long Hazira-Vijaipurstations are located on or near the coalfields. Jagdishpur (HVJ) cross country gas pipeline, constructed by GAIL (India), linked Mumbai Petroleum High and Bassein gas fields with various Petroleum or mineral oil is the next major fertilizer, power and industrial complexes in energy source in India after coal. It provides western and northen India. This artery fuel for heat and lighting, lubricants for provided impetus to Indian gas market machinery and raw materials for a number of development. Overall, India’s gas infrastructure manufacturing industries. Petroleum refineries has expanded over ten times from 1,700 km act as a “nodal industry” for synthetic textile, to 18,500 km of cross-country pipelines and fertiliser and numerous chemical industries. is expected to soon reach over 34, 000 km as Most of the petroleum occurrences in India Gas Grid by linking all gas sources and are associated with anticlines and fault traps consuming markets across the country in the rock formations of the tertiary age. In including North Eastern states. regions of folding, anticlines or domes, it occurs where oil is trapped in the crest of the Electricity upfold. The oil bearing layer is a porous Electricity has such a wide range of limestone or sandstone through which oil may applications in today’s world that, its percapita flow. The oil is prevented from rising or consumption is considered as an index of sinking by intervening non-porous layers. development. Electricity is generated mainly in Petroleum is also found in fault traps two  ways: by running water which drives hydro between porous and non-porous rocks. Gas, turbines to generate hydro electricity; and by being lighter  usually occurs above the oil. burning other fuels such as coal, petroleum Mumbai High, Gujarat and Assam are and natural gas to drive turbines to produce major petroleum production areas in India. thermal power. Once generated the electricity From the map locate the 3 major off shore is exactly the same. fields of western India. Ankeleshwar is the most important field of Gujarat. Assam is the oldest oil producing state of India. Digboi, Name some river valley projects and write Naharkatiya and Moran-Hugrijan are the the names of the dams built on these rivers. important oil fields in the state. Natural Gas Hydro electricity is generated by fast Natural Gas is found with petroleum deposits flowing water, which is a renewable resource. and is released when crude oil is brought to India has a number of multi-purpose projects the surface. It can be used as a domestic and like the Bhakra Nangal, Damodar Valley industrial fuel. It is used as fuel in power sector corporation, the Kopili Hydel Project etc. to generate electricity, for heating purpose in producing hydroelectric power. industries, as raw material in chemical, Thermal electricity is generated by using petrochemical and fertilizer industries, as coal, petroleum and natural gas. The thermal transport fuel and as cooking fuel. With the power stations use non-renewable fossil fuels expansion of gas infrastructure and local city for generating electricity. 52 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II Reprint 2024-25 Rawat Bhata India:  Distribution of Nuclear and Thermal Power Plants MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES 53 Reprint 2024-25 Collect information about thermal/hydel power plants located in your state. Show them on the map of India. Non-Conventional Sources of Energy The growing consumption of energy has resulted in the country becoming increasingly dependent on fossil fuels such as coal, oil and gas.  Rising prices of oil and gas and their potential shortages have raised uncertainties about the security of energy supply in future, which in turn has serious repercussions on the Fig. 5.10:  Solar operated electronic milk testing equipment growth of the national economy. Moreover, increasing use of fossil fuels also causes serious environmental problems. Hence, there Collect information about newly established is a pressing need to use renewable energy solar power plants in India. sources like solar energy, wind, tide, biomass Wind power and energy from waste material. These are called non-conventional energy sources. India has great potential of wind power. The India is blessed with an abundance of largest wind farm cluster is located in Tamil sunlight, water, wind and biomass. It has the Nadu from Nagarcoil to Madurai. Apart from largest programmes for the development of these, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Gujarat, these renewable energy resources. Kerala, Maharashtra and Lakshadweep have important wind farms. Nagarcoil and Nuclear or Atomic Energy Jaisalmer are well known for effective use of It is obtained by altering the structure of wind energy in the country. atoms. When such an alteration is made, much energy is released in the form of heat and this is used to generate electric power. Uranium and Thorium, which are available in Jharkhand and the Aravalli ranges of Rajasthan are used for generating atomic or nuclear power. The Monazite sands of Kerala is also rich in Thorium. Locate the 6 nuclear power stations and find out the state in which they are located. Solar Energy Fig. 5.11:  Wind mills – Nagarcoil India is a tropical country. It has enormous Biogas possibilities of tapping solar energy. Photovoltaic technology converts sunlight Shrubs, farm waste, animal and human waste directly into electricity. Solar energy is fast are used to produce biogas for domestic becoming popular in rural and remote areas. consumption in rural areas. Decomposition Some big solar power plants are being of organic matter yields gas, which has higher established in different parts of India which thermal efficiency in comparison to kerosene, will minimise the dependence of rural dung cake and charcoal. Biogas plants are households on firewood and dung cakes, set up at municipal, cooperative and which in turn will contribute to environmental individual levels. The plants using cattle dung conservation and adequate supply of manure are known as ‘Gobar gas plants’ in rural India. in agriculture. These provide twin benefits to the farmer in the form of energy and improved quality of 54 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II Reprint 2024-25 manure. Biogas is by far the most efficient geothermal gradient is high, high temperatures use of cattle dung. It improves the quality of are found at shallow depths. Groundwater in manure and also prevents the loss of trees such areas absorbs heat from the rocks and and manure due to burning of fuel wood becomes hot. It is so hot that when it rises to and cow dung cakes. the earth’s surface, it turns into steam. This steam is used to drive turbines and generate electricity. There are several hundred hot springs in India, which could be used to generate electricity. Two experimental projects have been set up in India to harness geothermal energy. One is located in the Parvati valley near Manikarn in Himachal Pradesh and the other is located in the Puga Valley, Ladakh. Conservation of Energy Resources Energy is a basic requirement for economic development.  Every sector of the national Fig. 5.12:  Biogas Plant economy – agriculture, industry, transport, commercial and domestic – needs inputs of Tidal Energy energy. The economic development plans Oceanic tides can be used to generate implemented since Independence necessarily electricity. Floodgate dams are built across required increasing amounts of energy to inlets. During high tide water flows into the remain operational.  As a result, consumption inlet and gets trapped when the gate is closed. of energy in all forms has been steadily rising After the tide falls outside the flood gate, the all over the country. water retained by the floodgate flows back to In this background, there is an urgent need the sea via a pipe that carries it through a to develop a sustainable path of energy power-generating turbine. development. Promotion of energy conservation In India the Gulf of Khambhat, the Gulf and increased use of renewable energy sources of Kuchchh in Gujarat on the western coast are the twin planks of sustainable energy. and Gangetic delta in Sunderban regions of India is presently one of the least energy West Bengal provide ideal conditions for efficient countries in the world. We have to utilising tidal energy. adopt a cautious approach for the judicious use of our limited energy resources. For Geo Thermal Energy example, as concerned citizens we can do our Geo thermal energy refers to the heat and bit by using public transport systems instead electricity produced by using the heat from of individual vehicles; switching off electricity the interior of the Earth. Geothermal energy when not in use, using power-saving devices exists because, the Earth grows progressively and using non-conventional sources of energy. hotter with increasing depth. Where the After all, “energy saved is energy produced”. EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES 1. Multiple choice questions. (i) Which one of the following minerals is formed by decomposition of rocks, leaving a residual mass of weathered material? (a) coal (b) bauxite (c) gold (d) zinc (ii) Koderma, in Jharkhand is the leading producer of which one of the following minerals? (a) bauxite (b) mica (c) iron ore (d) copper MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES 55 Reprint 2024-25 (iii) Minerals are deposited and accumulated in the stratas of which of the following rocks? (a) sedimentary rocks (c) igneous rocks (b) metamorphic rocks (d) none of the above (iv) Which one of the following minerals is contained in the Monazite sand? (a) oil (b) uranium (c) thorium (d) coal 2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words. (i) Distinguish between the following in not more than 30 words. (a) ferrous and non-ferrous minerals (b) conventional and non-conventional sources of energy (ii) What is a mineral? (iii) How are minerals formed in igneous and metamorphic rocks? (iv) Why do we need to conserve mineral resources ? 3. Answer the following questions in about 120 words. (i) Describe the distribution of coal in India. (ii) Why do you think that solar energy has a bright future in India? ACTIVITY Fill the name of the correct mineral in the crossword below: 2 1 M 2 M 4 3 M 4 T 1 5 5 T 6 o 7 y 56 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II Reprint 2024-25 ACROSS DOWN 1. A ferrous mineral (9) 1. Found in placer deposit (4) 2. Raw material for cement industry (9) 2. Iron ore mined in Bailadila (8) 3. Finest iron ore with magnetic properties (9) 3. Indispensable for electrical industry (4) 4. Highest quality hard coal (10) 4. Geological Age of coal found in north east 5. Aluminium is obtained from this ore (7) India (8) 6. Khetri mines are famous for this mineral (6) 5. Formed in veins and lodes (3) 7. Formed due to evaporation (6) MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES 57 Reprint 2024-25