On the occassion of Diwali, Harish went to IMPORTANCE OF MANUFACTURING a market with his parents. They purchased Manufacturing sector is considered the backbone shoes and clothes for him. His mother of development in general and economic purchased utensils, sugar, tea and diyas development in particular mainly because– (earthen lamps). Harish observed that the shops in the market were flooded with • Manufacturing industries not only help in items for sale. He wondered how so many modernising agriculture, which forms the items could be made in such large backbone of our economy, they also reduce quantities. His father explained that shoes, the heavy dependence of people on clothes, sugar etc. are manufactured by agricultural income by providing them jobs machines in large industries, some utensils in secondary and tertiary sectors. are manufactured in small industries, while • Industrial development is a precondition for items like diyas are made by individual eradication of unemployment and poverty artisans in household industry. from our country. This was the main philosophy behind public sector industries Do you have some ideas about these and joint sector ventures in India. It was also industries? aimed at bringing down regional disparities by establishing industries in tribal and backward areas. Production of goods in large quantities after • Export of manufactured goods expands processing from raw materials to more trade and commerce, and brings in much valuable products is called manufacturing. Do needed foreign exchange. you know that paper is manufactured from wood, sugar from sugarcane, iron and steel • Countries that transform their raw from iron ore and aluminium from bauxite? materials into a wide variety of finished Do you also know that some types of clothes goods of higher value are prosperous. are manufactured from yarn which itself is an India’s prosperity lies in increasing and industrial product? diversifying its manufacturing industries as People employed in the secondary activities quickly as possible. manufacture the primary materials into Agriculture and industry are not exclusive finished goods. The workers employed in steel of each other. They move hand in hand.  For factories, car, breweries, textile industries, instance, the agro-industries in India have bakeries etc. fall into this category. Some people given a major boost to agriculture by raising are employed in providing services. In this its productivity. They depend on the latter for chapter, we are mainly concerned with raw materials and sell their products such as manufacturing industries which fall in the irrigation pumps, fertilisers, insecticides, secondary sector. pesticides, plastic and PVC pipes, machines The economic strength of a country is and tools, etc. to the farmers. Thus, measured by the development of development and competitiveness of manufacturing industries. 58 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II Reprint 2024-25 manufacturing industry has not only allowed on the assets of a unit. This limit assisted agriculturists in increasing their has changed over a period of time. At production but also made the production present the maximum investment allowed processes very efficient. is rupees one crore. In the present day world of globalisation, our industry needs to be more efficient and On the basis of ownership: competitive. Self-sufficiency alone is not • Public sector, owned and operated by enough. Our manufactured goods must be government agencies – BHEL, SAIL etc. at par in quality with those in the • Private sector industries owned and international market. Only then, will we be operated by individuals or a group of able to compete in the international market. individuals –TISCO, Bajaj Auto Ltd., Dabur Industries. • Joint sector industries which are jointly run Classification of Industries by the state and individuals or a group of individuals. Oil India Ltd. (OIL) is jointly List the various manufactured products you owned by public and private sector. use in your daily life such as – transistors, electric bulbs, vegetable oil, cement, • Cooperative sector industries are owned glassware, petrol, matches, scooters, and operated by the producers or automobiles, medicines and so on. If we suppliers of raw materials, workers or classify the various industries based on a both.  They pool in the resources and share particular criterion then we would be the profits or losses proportionately. Such able to understand their manufacturing examples are the sugar industry in better.  Industries may be classified as Maharashtra, the coir industry in Kerala. follows: Based on the bulk and weight of raw material On the basis of source of raw materials and finished goods: used: • Heavy industries such as iron and steel • Agro based: cotton, woollen, jute, silk • Light industries that use light raw textile, rubber and sugar, tea, coffee, materials and produce light goods such edible oil. as electrical goods industries. • Mineral based: iron and steel, cement, aluminium, machine tools, petrochemicals. Classify the following into two groups on the According to their main role: basis of bulk and weight of raw material and • Basic or key industries are those which finished goods. supply their products as raw materials to (i) Oil (vi) Sewing Machines manufacture other goods e.g. iron and (ii) Knitting needles (vii) Shipbuilding steel and copper smelting, aluminum smelting. (iii) Brassware (viii) Electric Bulbs • Consumer industries that produce goods (iv) Fuse wires (ix) Paint brushes for direct use by consumers – sugar, (v) Watches (x) Automobiles toothpaste, paper, sewing machines, fans etc. Agro-based Industries On the basis of capital investment: Cotton, jute, silk, woollen textiles, sugar and • A small scale industry is defined with edible oil, etc. industries are  based on reference to the maximum investment agricultural raw materials. MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES 59 Reprint 2024-25 Fig. 6.1:  Value addition in the textile industry Textile Industry: The textile industry dyeing, designing, packaging, tailoring and occupies unique position in the Indian sewing. The industry by creating demands economy, because it contributes significantly supports many other industries, such as, to industrial production, employment chemicals and dyes, packaging materials generation and foreign exchange earnings. It and engineering works. is the only industry in the country, which is While spinning continues to be centralised self-reliant and complete in the value chain in Maharashtra, Gujarat and Tamil Nadu, i.e., from raw material to the highest value weaving is highly decentralised to provide added products. scope for incorporating traditional skills and designs of weaving in cotton, silk, zari, Cotton Textiles: In ancient India, cotton embroidery, etc. India has world class textiles were produced with hand spinning production in spinning, but weaving supplies and handloom weaving techniques. After low quality of fabric as it cannot use much of the 18th century, power-looms came into the high quality yarn produced in the country. use.  Our traditional industries suffered a Weaving is done by handloom, powerloom and setback during the colonial period because in mills. they could not compete with the mill-made The handspun khadi provides large scale cloth from England. employment to weavers in their homes as a cottage industry. • The first successful textile mill was Why did Mahatma Gandhi lay emphasis on established in Mumbai in 1854. spinning yarn and weaving khadi? • The two world wars were fought in Europe, Why is it important for our country to India was a British colony. There was a keep the mill sector loomage lower than demand for cloth in U.K. hence, they gave power loom and handloom? a boost to the development of the cotton textile industry. Jute Textiles India is the largest producer of raw jute and jute goods and stands at second place as an In the early years, the cotton textile exporter after Bangladesh. Most of the mills are industry was concentrated in the cotton located in West Bengal, mainly along the banks growing belt of Maharashtra and Gujarat. of the Hugli river, in a narrow belt. Availability of raw cotton, market, transport including accessible port facilities, labour, moist climate, etc. contributed towards its The first jute mill was set up near Kolkata in localisation.  This industry has close links 1855 at Rishra.  After Partition in 1947, the with agriculture and provides a living to jute mills remained in India but three-fourth farmers, cotton boll pluckers and workers of the jute producing area went to engaged in ginning, spinning, weaving, Bangladesh (erstwhile East Pakistan). 60 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II Reprint 2024-25 India:  Distribution of cotton, woollen and silk industries MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES 61 Reprint 2024-25 Factors responsible for their location in the Mineral-based Industries Hugli basin are: proximity of the jute producing Industries that use minerals and metals as raw areas, inexpensive water transport, supported materials are called mineral-based industries. by a good network of railways, roadways and Can you name some industries that would fall waterways to facilitate movement of raw in this category? material to the mills, abundant water for processing raw jute, cheap labour from West Iron and Steel Industry Bengal and adjoining states of Bihar, Odisha The iron and steel industry is the basic industry and Uttar Pradesh. Kolkata as a large urban since all the other industries — heavy, medium centre provides banking, insurance and port and light, depend on it for their machinery. facilities for export of jute goods. Steel is needed to manufacture a variety of engineering goods, construction material, Sugar Industry defence, medical, telephonic, scientific India stands second as a world producer of equipment and a variety of  consumer goods. sugar but occupies the first place in the production of gur and khandsari. The raw material used in this industry is bulky, and in Make a list of all such goods made of steel haulage its sucrose content reduces. The mills that you can think of. are located in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Punjab, Haryana and Production and consumption of steel is Madhya Pradesh. Sixty per cent mills are in often regarded as the index of a country’s Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. This industry is development. Iron and steel is a heavy industry seasonal in nature so, it is ideally suited to the because all the raw materials as well as cooperative sector. Can you explain why this finished goods are heavy and bulky entailing is so? heavy transportation costs. Iron ore, coking In recent years, there is a tendency for the coal and lime stone are required in the ratio of mills to shift and concentrate in the southern approximately 4 : 2 : 1. Some quantities of and western states, especially in Maharashtra, manganese, are also required to harden the This is because the cane produced here has a steel. Where should the steel plants be ideally higher sucrose content. The cooler climate also located?  Remember that the finished products ensures a longer crushing season. Moreover, also need an efficient transport network for the cooperatives are more successful in these their distribution to the markets and states. consumers. Processes of Manufacture of Steel Fig. 6.2 62 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II Reprint 2024-25 India:  Iron and Steel Plants MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES 63 Reprint 2024-25 Chhotanagpur plateau region has the Aluminium smelting plants in the country maximum concentration of iron and steel are located in Odisha, West Bengal, Kerala, industries. It is largely, because of the relative Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,  Maharashtra and advantages this region has for the development Tamil Nadu. of this industry. These include, low cost of iron Bauxite, the raw material used in the ore, high grade raw materials in proximity, smelters is a very bulky, dark reddish coloured cheap labour and vast growth potential in the rock. The flow chart given below shows the home market. process of manufacturing aluminium.  Regular supply of electricity and an assured source of Aluminium Smelting raw material at minimum cost are the two Aluminium smelting is the second most prime factors for location of the industry. important metallurgical industry in India.  It is light, resistant to corrosion, a good conductor of Chemical Industries heat, malleable and becomes strong when it is The Chemical industry in India is fast growing mixed with other metals. It is used to and diversifying. It comprises both large and manufacture aircraft, utensils and wires. It has small scale manufacturing units. Rapid growth gained popularity as a substitute of steel, copper, has been recorded in both inorganic and zinc and lead in a number of industries. organic sectors.  Inorganic chemicals include sulphuric acid (used to manufacture fertilizers, synthetic fibres, plastics, adhesives, paints, dyes stuffs), nitric acid, alkalies, soda ash (used to make glass, soaps and detergents, paper) and caustic soda.  These industries are widely spread over the country. Why do you think it is so? Organic chemicals include petrochemicals, which are used for manufacturing of synthetic fibers, synthetic rubber, plastics, dye-stuffs, Fig. 6.3: Strip coasting mill at smelter of NALCO drugs and pharmaceuticals. Organic chemical Fig. 6.4 Fig. 6.5 64 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II Reprint 2024-25 plants are located near oil refineries or Automobile Industry petrochemical plants. Automobiles provide vehicle for quick The chemical industry is its own largest transport of good services and passengers. consumer. Basic chemicals undergo processing Trucks, buses, cars, motor cycles, scooters, to further produce other chemicals that are three-wheelers and multi-utility vehicles are used for industrial application, agriculture or manufactured in India at various centres. After directly for consumer markets.  Make a list of the liberalisation, the coming in of new and the products you are aware of. contemporary models stimulated the demand Fertilizer Industry for vehicles in the market, which led to the healthy growth of the industry including The fertilizer industry is centred around the passenger cars, two and three-wheelers. The production of nitrogenous fertilizers  (mainly industry is located around Delhi, Gurugram, urea), phosphatic fertilizers and ammonium Mumbai, Pune, Chennai, Kolkata, Lucknow, phosphate (DAP) and complex fertilizers which Indore, Hyderabad, Jamshedpur and have a combination of nitrogen (N), phosphate Bengaluru. (P), and potash (K). The third, i.e. potash is entirely imported as the country does not have Information Technology and any reserves of commercially usable potash or Electronics Industry potassium compounds in any form. The electronics industry covers a wide range After the Green Revolution the industry of products from transistor sets to television, expanded to several other parts of the country. telephones, cellular telecom, telephone Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab and exchange, radars, computers and many Kerala contribute towards half of the fertilizer other equipments required by the production. Other significant producers are telecommunication industry. Bengaluru has Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan, Bihar, emerged as the electronic capital of India. Other Maharashtra, Assam, West Bengal, Goa, Delhi, important centres for electronic goods are Madhya Pradesh and Karnataka. Mumbai, Delhi, Hyderabad, Pune, Chennai, Cement Industry Kolkata, Lucknow and Coimbatore.   The major industry concentration is at Bengaluru, Noida, Cement is essential for construction activity Mumbai, Chennai, Hyderabad and Pune.  A such as building houses, factories, bridges, major impact of this industry has been on roads, airports, dams and for other commercial employment generation. The continuing establishments. This industry requires bulky growth in the hardware and software is the key and heavy raw materials like limestone, silica to the success of IT industry in India. and gypsum. Coal and electric power are needed apart from rail transportation. Where would it be economically viable to set up the cement manufacturing units? The industry has strategically located plants in Gujarat that have suitable access to the market in the Gulf countries. Find out where the plants are located in other States of India. Find their names. The first cement plant was set-up in Fig. 6.6:  Cable manufacturing facilities at HCL, Chennai in 1904. After Independence the Rupnarainpur (West Bengal) industry expanded. MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES 65 Reprint 2024-25 Industrial Pollution and Environmental Dumping of wastes specially glass, harmful Degradation chemicals, industrial effluents, packaging, salts Although industries contribute significantly to and garbage renders the soil useless. Rain India’s economic growth and development, the water percolates to the soil carrying the increase in pollution of land, water, air, noise pollutants to the ground and the ground water and resulting degradation of environment that also gets contaminated. they have caused, cannot be overlooked. Noise pollution not only results in irritation Industries are responsible for four types of and anger, it can also cause hearing pollution: (a) Air  (b) Water (c) Land (d) Noise. impairment, increased heart rate and blood The polluting industries also include thermal pressure among other physiological effects. power plants. Unwanted sound is an irritant and a source of Air pollution is caused by the presence of high stress.  Industrial and construction activities, proportion of undesirable gases, such as machinery, factory equipment, generators, sulphur dioxide and carbon monoxide. Air- saws and pneumatic and electric drills also borne particulate materials contain both solid make a lot of noise. and liquid particles like dust, sprays mist and Control of Environmental Degradation smoke. Smoke is emitted by chemical and paper factories, brick kilns, refineries and Every litre of waste water discharged by our smelting plants, and burning of fossil fuels in industry pollutes eight times the quantity of big and small factories that ignore pollution freshwater. How can the industrial pollution of norms. Toxic gas leaks can be very hazardous fresh water be reduced? Some suggestions arewith long-term effects. Are you aware of the (i) minimising use water for processing by Bhopal Gas tragedy that occurred? Air reusing and recycling it in two or more pollution adversely affects human health, successive stages animals, plants, buildings and the atmosphere (ii) harvesting of rainwater to meet water as a whole. requirements Water pollution is caused by organic and (iii) treating hot water and  effluents before inorganic industrial wastes and affluents releasing them in rivers and ponds. discharged into rivers. The main culprits in this Treatment of industrial effluents can be regard are paper, pulp, chemical, textile and done in three phases dyeing, petroleum refineries, tanneries and (a) Primary treatment by mechanical means. electroplating industries that let out dyes, This involves screening, grinding, detergents, acids, salts and heavy metals like flocculation and sedimentation. lead and mercury pesticides, fertilisers, (b) Secondary treatment by biological process synthetic chemicals with carbon, plastics and rubber, etc. into the water bodies. Fly ash, (c) Tertiary treatment by biological, phospo- gypsum and iron and steel slags are chemical and physical processes. This the major solid wastes in India. involves recycling of wastewater. Overdrawing of ground water reserves by Thermal pollution of water occurs when hot industry where there is a threat to ground water from factories and thermal plants is water resources also needs to be regulated drained into rivers and ponds before cooling. legally. Particulate matter in the air can be What would be the effect on aquatic life? reduced by fitting smoke stacks to factories Wastes from nuclear power plants, nuclear with electrostatic precipitators, fabric filters, and weapon production facilities cause scrubbers and inertial separators. Smoke cancers, birth defects and miscarriages. Soil and water pollution are closely related. can be reduced by using oil or gas instead 66 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II Reprint 2024-25 India:  Some Software Technology Parks MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES 67 Reprint 2024-25 of coal in factories. Machinery and (a) Optimum utilisation of equipment equipment can be used and generators adopting latest techniques and should be fitted with silencers. Almost all upgrading existing equipment. machinery can be redesigned to increase (b) Minimising waste generation by energy efficiency and reduce noise. Noise maximising ash utilisation. absorbing material may be used apart from (c) Providing green belts for nurturing personal use of earplugs and earphones. ecological balance and addressing the The challenge of sustainable development question of special purpose vehicles for requires integration of economic development with environmental concerns. afforestation. (d) Reducing environmental pollution through ash pond management, ash water recycling system and liquid waste management. (e) Ecological monitoring, reviews and on-line database management for all its power stations. Fig. 6.7:  Sewage Treatment plant under Yamuna action plan at Faridabad NTPC shows the way NTPC is a major power providing corporation in India. It has ISO certification for EMS (Environment Management System) 14001. The corporation has a proactive approach for preserving the natural environment and resources like water, oil and gas and fuels in places where it is setting up power plants. Fig. 6.8:  Ramagundam plant This has been possible through- EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES 1. Multiple choice questions. (i) Which one of the following industries uses bauxite as a raw material? (a) Aluminium Smelting (b) Cement  (c) Paper     (d) Steel (ii) Which one of the following industries manufactures telephones, computer, etc. (a) Steel (c) Aluminium Smelting (b) Electronic (d) Information Technology 2. Answer the following briefly in not more than 30 words. (i) What is manufacturing? (ii) What are basic industries? Give an example. 68 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II Reprint 2024-25 3. Write the answers of the following questions in 120 words. (i) How do industries pollute the environment? (ii) Discuss the steps to be taken to minimise environmental degradation by industry? ACTIVITY Give one word for each of the following with regard to industry.  The number of letters in each word are hinted in brackets. (i) Used to drive machinery (5) P........................... (ii) People who work in a factory (6) W.......................... (iii) Where the product is sold (6) M.......................... (iv) A person who sells goods (8) R........................... (v) Thing produced (7) P........................... (vi) To make or produce (11) M.......................... (vii) Land, Water and Air degraded (9) P........................... PROJECT WORK Select one agro-based and one mineral-based industry in your area. (i) What are the raw materials they use? (ii) What are the other inputs in the process of manufacturing that involve transportation cost? (iii) Are these factories following environmental norms? ACTIVITY Solve the puzzle by following your search horizontally and vertically to find the hidden answers. 1. Textiles, sugar, vegetable oil and plantation industries deriving raw materials from agriculture are called… 2. The basic raw material for sugar industry. 3. This fibre is also known  as the ‘Golden Fibre’. 4. Iron-ore, coking coal, and limestone are the chief raw materials of this industry. 5. A public sector steel plant located in Chhattisgarh. MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES 69 Reprint 2024-25 ACTIVITY Solve the puzzle by following your search horizontally and vertically to find the hidden answers. G G G P V A R A N A S I U O J I P G X K M Q W V K S U G A R C A N E E N O T T O N O Z V O P T R A U E L U B H I L A I U T K O C R A Q N T R L N E I R O N S T E E L S J E N A N O E P I T L R Y G A N U J D R A G D T A N T A R P O A P U E P Y A S N A E N J D I Y S K S M H V L I A J H S K G 1. Textiles, sugar, vegetable oil and plantation industries deriving raw materials from agriculture are called… 2. The basic raw material for sugar industry. 3. This fibre is also known  as the ‘Golden Fibre’. 4. Iron-ore, coking coal, and limestone are the chief raw materials of this industry. 5. A public sector steel plant located in Chhattisgarh. 6. Railway diesel engines are manufactured in Uttar Pradesh at this place. 70 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II Reprint 2024-25