We use different materials and services in our the help of equally developed communication daily life. Some of these are available in our system. Therefore, transport, communication immediate surroundings, while other and trade are complementary to each other. requirements are met by bringing things from Today, India is well-linked with the rest of other places. Goods and services do not move the world despite its vast size, diversity and from supply locales to demand locales on their linguistic and socio-cultural plurality. own. The movement of these goods and services Railways, airways, waterways, newspapers, from their supply locations to demand locations radio, television, cinema and internet, etc. have necessitates the need for transport. Some people been contributing to its socio-economic are engaged in facilitating these movements. progress in many ways. The trades from local These are known to be traders who make the to international levels have added to the vitality products come to the consumers by of its economy. It has enriched our life and transportation. Thus, the pace of development added substantially to growing amenities and of a country depends upon the production of facilities for the comforts of life. goods and services as well as their movement In this chapter, you will see how modern over space. Therefore, efficient means of transport means of transport and communication serve are prerequisites for fast development. as lifelines of our nation and its modern Movement of these goods and services can be economy. It is thus, evident that a dense and over three important domains of our earth i.e. land, efficient network of transport and water and air. Based on these, transport can also communication is a prerequisite for local, be classified into land, water and air transport. national and global trade of today. Fig. 7.1 For a long time, trade and transport were TRANSPORT restricted to a limited space. With the development in science and technology, the Roadways area of influence of trade and transport India has second largest road networks in the expanded far and wide. Today, the world has world, aggregating to about 62.16 lakh km been converted into a large village with the help (2020–21). In India, roadways have preceded of efficient and fast moving transport. railways. They still have an edge over railways Transport has been able to achieve this with in view of the ease with which they can be built Reprint 2024-25 and maintained. The growing importance of road transport vis-à-vis rail transport is rooted in the following reasons; (a) construction cost of roads is much lower than that of railway lines, (b) roads can traverse comparatively more dissected and undulating topography, (c) roads can negotiate higher gradients of slopes and as such can traverse mountains such as the Himalayas, (d) road transport is economical in transportation of few persons and relatively smaller amount of goods over short distances, (e) it also provides door to-door service, thus the cost of loading and unloading is much lower, (f) road transport is also used as a feeder to other modes of transport such as they provide a Fig.7.2:  Ahmedabad- Vadodara Expressway link between railway stations, air and sea ports. In India, roads are classified in the Collect information of National Highway following six classes according to their numbers (old and new) from the website capacity. Look at the map of the National morth.nic.in/national-highway-details. The Highways and find out about the significant historical Sher-Shah Suri Marg between role played by these roads. Delhi and Amritsar is known by which National Highway ? • Golden Quadrilateral Super Highways: The government has launched a major road development project linking Delhi- • District Roads: These roads connect the Kolkata-Chennai-Mumbai and Delhi by district headquarters with other places of six-lane Super Highways. The North- the district. South corridors linking Srinagar (Jammu • Other Roads: Rural roads, which link rural & Kashmir) and Kanniyakumari (Tamil areas and villages with towns, are classified Nadu), and East-West Corridor under this category. These roads received connecting Silchar (Assam) and Porbander special impetus under the Pradhan Mantri (Gujarat) are part of this project. The Grameen Sadak Yojana. Under this scheme major objective of these Super Highways special provisions are made so that every is to reduce the time and distance village in the country is linked to a major between the mega cities of India. These town in the country by an all season highway projects are being implemented motorable road. by the National Highway Authority of • Border Roads: Apart from these, Border India (NHAI). Roads Organisation a Government of India • National Highways: National Highways undertaking constructs and maintains link extreme parts of the country. These roads in the bordering areas of the are the primary road systems. A number country. This organisation was established of major National Highways run in North- in 1960 for the development of the roads South and East-West directions. of strategic importance in the northern and • State Highways: Roads linking a state north-eastern border areas. These roads capital with different district headquarters have improved accessibility in areas of are known as State Highways. difficult terrain and have helped in the economic development of these area. 72 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II Reprint 2024-25 India:  National Highways LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY 73 Reprint 2024-25 Railways Rai lways are the pr incipal  mode of The World’s longest Highway tunnel-Atal transportation for freight and passengers Tunnel (9.02 Km) has been built by Border in India. Railways also make it possible for Road Organisation. This tunnel connects people to conduct multifarious activities Manali to Lahul-Spiti valley throughout the like business, sightseeing, pilgrimage year. Earlier the valley was cut off for about along with transportation of goods over 6 months each year owing to heavy snowfall. longer distances. Apart from an important The tunnel is buit with ultra-modern means of transport the Indian Railways specifications in the Pir Panjal range of have been a great integrating force for more Himalayas at an altitude of 3000 metres than 150 years. Railways in India bind the from the Mean Sea Level (MSL). economic life of the country as well as Source: http://www.bro.gov.in/pagefimg. accelerate the development of the industry asp?imid=144,And PIBdelhi03October2020 and agriculture. The Indian Railways is the largest public sector undertaking in the country. The first train steamed off from Mumbai to Thane in 1853, covering a distance of 34 km. The Indian Railway is now reorganised into 17 zones. Find out the current Railway zones and their headquarters. Also locate the headquarters of Railway zones on the map of India. Fig. 7.3:  Hilly Tracts The distribution pattern of the Railway network in the country has been largely influenced by physiographic, economic and administrative factors.  The northern plains with their vast level land, high population density and rich agricultural resources provided the most favourable condition for their growth.  However, a large number of rivers requiring construction of bridges across their wide beds posed some obstacles.  In the hilly terrains of the peninsular region, railway tracts are laid through low hills, Fig. 7.4:  Traffic on north-eastern border road gaps or tunnels. The Himalayan mountainous (Arunachal Pradesh) regions too are unfavourable for the construction Roads can also be classified on the basis of of railway lines due to high relief, sparse the type of material used for their construction population and lack of economic opportunities. such as metalled and unmetalled roads. Likewise, it was difficult to lay railway lines on Metalled roads may be made of cement, the sandy plain of western Rajasthan, swamps concrete or even bitumen of coal, therefore, of Gujarat, forested tracks of Madhya Pradesh, these are all weather roads. Unmetalled roads Chhattisgarh, Odisha and Jharkhand.  The go out of use in the rainy season. contiguous stretch of Sahyadri could be crossed 74 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II Reprint 2024-25 Table 7.1: India: Railway Track The Indian Railway network runs on multiple gauge operations extending over 67,956 km. Gauge in metres Route (Km) Broad Gauge (1.676) 63950 Metre Gauge (1.000) 2,402 Narrow Gauge (0.762 and 0.610) 1,604 Total 67,956 Source: Railway Yearbook 2019–20, Ministry of Railways, Government of India. Website: www.indianrailways.gov.in only through gaps or passes (Ghats). In recent There are three important networks of times, the development of the Konkan railway pipeline transportation in the country. along the west coast has facilitated the movement • From oil field in upper Assam to Kanpur of passengers and goods in this most important (Uttar Pradesh), via Guwahati, Barauni and economic region of India. It has also faced a Allahabad. It has branches from Barauni to number of problem such as sinking of track in Haldia, via Rajbandh, Rajbandh to some stretches and landslides. Maurigram and Guwahati to Siliguri. Today, the railways have become more • From Salaya in Gujarat to Jalandhar in important in our national economy than all Punjab, via Viramgam, Mathura, Delhi and other means of transport put together. However, Sonipat. It has branches to connect Koyali rail transport suffers from certain problems as (near Vadodara, Gujarat) Chakshu and well. Many passengers travel without tickets. other places. Thefts and damaging of railway property has • The first 1,700 km long Hazira-Vijaipurnot yet stopped completely.  People stop the Jagdishpur (HVJ) cross country gas trains, pull the chain unnecessarily and this pipeline, linked Mumbai High and Bassein causes heavy damage to the railway. Think over gas fields with various ferilizer, power and it, how we can help our railway in running as industrial complexes in western and per the scheduled time? northern India. Overall, India’s gas pipeline infrastructure has expanded from 1,700 km Pipelines to 18,500 km of cross-country pipelines. Pipeline transport network is a new arrival on the transportation map of India.  In the past, Waterways these were used to transport water to cities and Since the ancient period, India was one of the industries. Now, these are used for transporting seafaring countries.  Its seamen sailed far and crude oil, petroleum products and natural gas near, thus, carrying and spreading Indian from oil and natural gas fields to refineries, commerce and culture. Waterways are the fertilizer factories and big thermal power plants. cheapest means of transport. They are most Solids can also be transported through a suitable for carrying heavy and bulky goods. pipeline when converted into slurry. The far It is a fuel-efficient and environment friendly inland locations of refineries like Barauni, mode of transport. India has inland navigation Mathura, Panipat and gas based fertilizer plants waterways of 14,500 km in length. Out of these could be thought of only because of pipelines. only 5685 km are navigable by mechanised Initial cost of laying pipelines is high but vessels. The following waterways have been subsequent running costs are minimal.  It rules declared as the National Waterways by the out trans-shipment losses or delays. Government. LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY 75 Reprint 2024-25 Activity Railway line has been extended from Banihal to Baramula in the Kashmir Valley. Locate these two towns on the map of India. 76 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II Reprint 2024-25 Deendayal Port, is a tidal port. It caters to the convenient handling of exports and imports of highly productive granary and industrial belt stretching across UT of Jammu and Kashmir, and the states of Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan and Gujarat. Fig. 7.5:  Inland waterways widely used in north-eastern states • The Ganga river between Allahabad and Haldia (1620 km)-N.W. No.1 • The Brahmaputra river between Sadiya and Dhubri (891 km)-N.W. No.2 • The West-Coast Canal in Kerala Fig. 7.6:  Trucks being driven into the vessel at (Kottapurma-Kollam, Udyogamandal and Mumbai port Champakkara canals-205 km) – N.W. No.3 Mumbai is the biggest port with a spacious • Specified stretches of Godavari and Krishna natural and well-sheltered harbour. The rivers along with Kakinada Puducherry Jawaharlal Nehru port was planned with a view stretch of canals (1078 km) – N.W. No.4 • Specified stretches of river Brahmani along to decongest the Mumbai port and serve as a with Matai river, delta  channels of Mahanadi hub port for this region. Marmagao port (Goa) and Brahmani rivers and East Coast Canal is the premier iron ore exporting port of the (588 km) – N.W. No.5 country. This port accounts for about fifty per There are some other inland water ways cent of India’s iron ore export. New Mangalore on which substantial transportation takes port, located in Karnataka caters to the export place. These are Mandavi, Zuari and of iron ore concentrates from Kudremukh Cumberjua, Sunderbans, Barak and mines. Kochchi is the extreme south-western backwaters of Kerala. port, located at the entrance of a lagoon with a natural harbour. Apart from these, India’s trade with foreign countries is carried from the ports located along the coast. 95 per cent of the country’s trade volume (68 per cent in terms of value) is moved by sea. Major Sea Ports With a long coastline of 7,516.6 km, India is dotted with 12 major and 200 notified nonmajors (minor/intermediate) ports. These major ports handle 95 per cent of India’s Fig. 7.7:  Tanker discharging crude oil at New Mangalore port foreign trade. Kandla in Kuchchh was the first port Moving along the east coast, you would see developed soon after Independence to ease the the extreme south-eastern port of Tuticorin, volume of trade on the Mumbai port, in the in Tamil Nadu. This port has a natural harbour wake of loss of Karachi port to Pakistan after and rich hinterland. Thus, it has a flourishing the Partition. Kandla also known as the trade handling of a large variety of cargoes to LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY 77 Reprint 2024-25 even our neighbouring countries like Sri Think of the north-eastern part of the country, Lanka, Maldives, etc. and the coastal regions marked with the presence of big rivers, of India. Chennai is one of the oldest artificial dissected relief, dense forests and frequent ports of the country. It is ranked next to floods and international frontiers, etc. in the Mumbai in terms of the volume of trade and absence of air transport. Air travel has made cargo. Vishakhapatnam is the deepest access easier. landlocked and well-protected port. This port Pawanhans Helicopters Ltd. provides was, originally, conceived as an outlet for iron helicopter services to Oil and Natural Gas ore exports. Paradwip port located in Odisha, Corporation in its off-shore operations, to specialises in the export of iron ore. Kolkata is inaccessible areas and difficult terrains like the an inland riverine port. This port serves a very north-eastern states and the interior parts of large and rich hinterland of Ganga- Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh Brahmaputra basin. Being a tidal port, it requires constant dredging of Hoogly. Haldia and Uttarakhand. port was developed as a subsidiary port, in order to relieve growing pressure on the UDAN (Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik) is a firstKolkata port. of-its kind scheme globally, designed to jump-start the regional aviation market. Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) – UDAN was conceived by the Ministry of Aviation (MoCA) to promote regional connectivity by making fly affordable for the common citizen. The central idea of the scheme is to encourage airlines to operate flights on regional and remote routes through enabling policies and extending incentives. Fig. 7.8:  Handling of oversize cargo at Tuticorin port Communication Airways Ever since humans appeared on the earth, they The air travel, today, is the fastest, most have used different means of communication. comfortable and prestigious mode of transport. But, the pace of change, has been rapid in modern times. Long distance communication is far easier without physical movement of the communicator or receiver. Personal communication and mass communication including television, radio, press, films, etc. are the major means of communication in the country. The Indian postal network is the largest in the world. It handles parcels as well as personal written communications. Cards and envelopes are considered first-class mail and are airlifted between stations covering both land and air. The second-class mail includes book packets, registered newspapers and periodicals. They are carried by surface mail, Why is air travel prefered in the north-eastern covering land and water transport. To facilitate states? quick delivery of mails in large towns and cities, Fig. 7.9 six mail channels have been introduced recently. They are called Rajdhani Channel, It can cover very difficult terrains like high Metro Channel, Green Channel, Business mountains, dreary deserts, dense forests and Channel, Bulk Mail Channel and also long oceanic stretches with great ease. Periodical Channel. 78 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II Reprint 2024-25 India:  Major Ports and Some International Airports LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY 79 Reprint 2024-25 of India, is one of the largest terrestrial networks in the world. It broadcasts a variety Digital India is an umbrella programme of programmes from entertainment, to prepare India for a knowledge based transformation. The focus of Digital India educational to sports, etc. for people of different Programme is on being transformative to age groups. realise – IT (Indian Talent) + IT (Information India publishes a large number of Technology)=IT (India Tomorrow) and is newspapers and periodicals annually. They on making technology central to enabling are of different types depending upon their change. periodicity. Newspapers are published in about 100 languages and dialects. Did you know that the largest number of newspapers published in the country are in Hindi, followed by English and Urdu? India is the largest producer of feature films in the world. It produces short films; video feature films and video short films. The Central Board of Film Certification is the authority to certify both Indian and foreign films. International Trade The exchange of goods among people, states and countries is referred to as trade. The Fig.7.10 : Emergency call box on NH-48 market is the place where such exchanges take place. Trade between two countries is India has one of the largest telecom called international trade. It may take place networks in Asia. Excluding urban places more through sea, air or land routes. While local than two-thirds of the villages in India have trade is carried in cities, towns and villages, already been covered with Subscriber Trunk state level trade is carried between two or more Dialling (STD) telephone facility. In order to states. Advancement of international trade of strengthen the flow of information from the a country is an index to its economic grassroot to the higher level, the government prosperity. It is, therefore, considered the has made special provision to extend twenty- economic barometer for a country. four hours STD facility to every village in the As the resources are space bound, no country. There is a uniform rate of STD country can survive without international facilities all over India. It has trade. Export and import are the components been made possible by integrating the of trade. The balance of trade of a country is development in space technology with the difference between its export and import. communication technology. When the value of export exceeds the value Mass communication provides of imports, it is called a favourable balance entertainment and creates awareness among of trade. On the contrary, if the value of people about various national programmes imports exceeds the value of exports, it is and policies. It includes radio, television, termed as unfavourable balance of trade. newspapers, magazines, books and films. All India has trade relations with all the major India Radio (Akashwani) broadcasts a variety trading blocks and all geographical regions of programmes in national, regional and local of the world. The commodities exported from languages for various categories of people, India to other countries include gems and spread over different parts of the country. jewellery, chemicals and related products, Doordarshan, the national television channel agriculture and allied products, etc. 80 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II Reprint 2024-25 The commodities imported to India adventure tourism, cultural tourism, medical include petroleum crude and products, tourism and business tourism. gems and jewellery, chemicals and related products, base metals, electronic items, There is a vast potential for development of machinery, agriculture and allied products. tourism in all parts of the country. Efforts are India has emerged as a software giant at the being made to promote different types of international level and it is earning large tourism for this upcoming industry. foreign exchange through the export of information technology. On the map of India show important tourist Tourism as a Trade places of your State/UT and its connectivity Tourism in India has grown substantially over with other parts of the country by railways/ the last three decades. roadways/airways. More than 15 million people are directly Discuss in the class: engaged in the tourism industry*. Tourism • What type of tourism may be developed in also promotes national integration, provides your state/UT and why? support to local handicrafts and cultural • Which areas in your state/UT you find more pursuits. It also helps in the development of attractive for development of tourism and why? international understanding about our • How tourism may be helpful for the economic culture and heritage. Foreign tourists visit development of a region adopting sustainable India for heritage tourism, eco tourism, development approach? Prepare a project on the heritage tourism in India. *Source: Annual Report 2016–17, Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Government of India. LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY 81 Reprint 2024-25 EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES 1. Multiple choice questions. (i) Which two of the following extreme locations are connected by the eastwest corridor? (a) Mumbai and Nagpur (c) Mumbai and Kolkata (b) Silchar and Porbandar (d) Nagpur and Siligudi (ii) Which mode of transportation reduces trans-shipment losses and delays? (a) Railways (c) Pipeline (b) Roadways (d) Waterways (iii) Which one of the following states is not connected with the H.V.J. pipeline? (a) Madhya Pradesh (c) Gujarat (b) Maharashtra (d) Uttar Pradesh (iv) Which one of the following ports is the deepest land-locked and wellprotected port along the east coast? (a) Chennai (c) Tuticorin (b) Paradwip (d) Vishakhapatnam (v) Which one of the following is the most important modes of transportation in India? (a) Pipeline (c) Roadways (b) Railways (d) Airways (vi) Which one of the following terms is used to describe trade between two or more countries? (a) Internal trade (c) External trade (b) International trade (d) Local trade 2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words. (i) State any three merits of roadways. (ii) Where and why is rail transport the most convenient means of transportation? (iii) What is the significance of the border roads? (iv) What is meant by trade? What is the difference between international and local trade? 3. Answer the following questions in about 120 words. (i) Why are the means of transportation and communication called the lifelines of a nation and its economy? (ii) Write a note on the changing nature of the international trade in the last fifteen years. QUIZ DRIVE 1. Northern terminal of the North-south corridor. 2. The headquarter of the southern railway zone. 3. The rail gauge with a track width of 1.676 m. 4. A Riverine Port. 5. Busiest railway junction in Northern India. 82 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II Reprint 2024-25 ACTIVITY Start your search vertically, horizontally or diagonally and reach various destinations across the country! S H E R S H A H S U R I M A R G A R T P R N X E L A T A D L A Y J M M X I P O R A Y M P G H T X Y C H E N N N A I I K M C A I M O D C D A L M C S O T P O R C P A P T R G S K J M J L E A N E R R A E T A J P O R M W M A S X O I L S B R O A D G A U G E L O T A S N L C M E C U K Z M A A J E L M U G H A L S A R A I B S N A G O E T V R A Y F T O R E A J M K Q A I P M N Y R Y A Y H L I N Q K O L K A T A E U I T W B E A N I T N K D E M O U R P N P J D LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY 83 Reprint 2024-25