C h a p t e r 5 Internet and Web “The internet could be a very positive step towards education, organisation and participation in a meaningful society.” —  Noam Chomsky In this chapter 5.1  IntroductIon to computer » Introduction to networks Computer Networks We are living in a connected world. » Types of Networks Information is being produced, exchanged, » Network Devices and traced across the globe in real time. It's » Networking Topologies possible as almost everyone and everything » The Internet in the digital world is interconnected through » Applications of Internet one way or the other. A group of two or more similar things » Website or people interconnected with each other » Web Page is called network (Figure 5.1). Some of the » Web Server examples of network in our everyday life » Hosting of a website include: •	 Social network » Browser •	 Mobile network •	 Network of computers •	 Airlines, railway, banks, hospitals networks. 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   137 10/9/2020   12:57:50 PM 138 InformatIcs PractIces A computer network (Figure 5.2) is an interconnection among two or more computers or computing devices. Such interconnection allows computers to share data and resources among each other. A basic network may connect a few computers placed in a room. Figure 5.1: Interconnection forming a social network The network size may vary from small to large depending on the number of computers it connects. A computer network can include different types of hosts (also called nodes) like server, desktop, laptop, cellular phones. Activity 5.1 A computer network (Figure 5.2) is an interconnection Identify some among two or more computers or computing devices. other networks in Such interconnection allows computers to share data the real world. and resources among each other. A basic network may connect a few computers placed in a room. The network size may vary from small to large depending on the number of computers it connects. A computer network can include different types of hosts (also called nodes) like server, desktop, laptop, cellular phones. Figure 5.2:  A computer network Apart from computers, networks include networking devices like switch, router, modem, etc. Networking devices are used to connect multiple computers in different settings. For communication, data in a network is divided into smaller chunks called packets. These 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   138 10/9/2020   12:57:50 PM Internet and Web 139 packets are then carried over a network.  Devices in a network can be connected either through wired media like cables or wireless media like air. In a communication network, each device that is a part of a network and that can receive, create, store or send data to different network routes is called a node. In the context of data communication, a node can be a device such as a modem, hub, bridge, switch, router, digital telephone handset, a printer, a computer or a server. Interconnectivity of computing devices in a network Activity 5.2 allows us to exchange information simultaneously with Create a hotspot using many parties through email, websites, audio/video a smartphone and calls, etc. Network allows sharing of resources. For connect other devices example, a printer can be made available to multiple to it. computers through a network; a networked storage can be accessed by multiple computers. People often connect their devices through hotspot, thus forming a small personal network. 5.2 types of networks There are various types of computer networks ranging from network of handheld devices (like mobile phones or tablets) connected through Wi-Fi or Bluetooth within a single room to the millions of computers spread across the globe. Some are connected wireless while others are connected through wires. Based on the geographical area covered and data transfer rate, computer networks are broadly categorised as: •	 LAN (Local Area Network) •	 MAN (Metropolitan Area Network) •	 WAN (Wide Area Network) 5.2.1 Local Area Network (LAN) It is a network that connects computers, mobile phones, tablet, mouse, printer, etc., placed at a limited distance. The geographical area covered by a LAN can range from a	 single	 room,	 a	 floor,	 an	 office	 having	 one	 or	 more buildings in the same premise, laboratory, a school, college, or university campus. The connectivity is done by	 means	 of	 wires,	 Ethernet	 cables,	 fibre	 optics,	 or Wi-Fi. A Local Area Network (LAN) is shown in Figure 5.3. 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   139 10/9/2020   12:57:50 PM 140 InformatIcs PractIces Figure 5.3: A Local Area Network LAN is comparatively secure as only authentic users in the network can access other computers or shared resources. Users can print documents using a connected printer, upload or download documents and software to and from the local server. Such LANs provide the short range communication with the high speed data transfer rates. These types of networks can be extended up to 1 km. Data transfer in LAN is quite high, and usually varies from 10 Mbps (called Ethernet) to 1000 Mbps (called Gigabit Ethernet), where Mbps stands for Megabits per second. Ethernet is a set of rules Think and Reflect that decides how computers and other devices connect with each other through cables in a local area network Explore	and	find	out	 or LAN. the minimum internet speed required to make 5.2.2 Metropolitan Area Network (MAN) a video call. Metropolitan Area Network (MAN) is an extended form of LAN which covers a larger geographical area like a city or a town. Data transfer rate in MAN also ranges in Mbps, but it is considerably less as compared to LAN. Cable TV network or cable based broadband internet services are examples of MAN. This kind of network 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   140 10/9/2020   12:57:51 PM Internet and Web 141 can be extended up to 30–40 km. Sometimes, many LANs are connected together to form MAN, as shown in Figure 5.4. LAN 1 Networking LAN 3 Device LAN 2 Figure 5.4: A Metropolitan Area Network 5.2.3 Wide Area Network (WAN) Wide Area Network (WAN) connects computers and others LANs and MANs, which are spread across different geographical locations of a country or in different countries or continents. A WAN could be formed by connecting a LAN to other LANs (Figure 5.5) via wired or wireless media. Large business, educational and government organisations connect their different branches in different locations across the world through WAN. The Internet is the largest WAN that connects billions of computers, smartphones and millions of LANs from different continents. 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   141 10/9/2020   12:57:51 PM 142 InformatIcs PractIces Network User Network User Network User Network User Network Switch Network Switch Network User Network User Internet Network User Network User Network User Network User LAN 1 - India LAN 1 - France Figure 5.5: A Wide Area Network 5.3 network devIces To communicate data through different transmission media	 and	 to	 configure	 networks	 with	 different functionality, we require different devices like Modem, Hub, Switch, Repeater, Router, Gateway, etc. Let us explore them in detail. Think and Reflect 5.3.1 Modem It is possible to access Modem stands for ‘MOdulator DEMolulator’. It refers to your bank account a device used for conversion between analog signals and from any part of the digital bits. We know computers store and process data world. Find if the in terms of 0s and 1s. However, to transmit data from bank’s network is a LAN, MAN, WAN or any a sender to a receiver, or while browsing the internet, other type. digital data are converted to an analog signal and the medium (be it free-space or a physical media) carries the signal to the receiver. There are modems connected to both the source and destination nodes. The modem at the sender’s end acts as a modulator that converts the digital data into analog signals. The modem at the receiver’s end acts as a demodulator that converts the analog signals into digital data for the destination node to understand. Figure 5.6 shows connectivity using a modem. Analog Signal Modulation Modulation Digital Signal Demodulation Demodulation Digital Signal Telephone Line Modem Modem Figure 5.6: Use of modem 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   142 10/9/2020   12:57:52 PM Internet and Web 143 5.3.2 Ethernet Card Ethernet card, also known as Network Interface Card (NIC card in short) is a network adaptor used to set up a wired network. It acts as an interface between computer and the network. It is a circuit board mounted on the motherboard of a computer as shown in Figure 5.7. The Ethernet cable connects the computer to the network through NIC. Ethernet cards can support data transfer between 10 Mbps and 1 Gbps (1000 Mbps). Each NIC has a MAC address, which helps in uniquely identifying the Figure 5.7: A Network Interface Card computer on the network. 5.3.3 Repeater Data are carried in the form of signals over the cable. These	 signals	 can	 travel	 a	 specified	 distance	 (usually about 100 m). Signals lose their strength beyond this limit and become weak. In such conditions, original signals need to be regenerated. A repeater is an analog device that works with signals on the cables to which it is connected. The weakened signal appearing on the cable is regenerated and put back on the cable by a repeater. 5.3.4 Hub An Ethernet hub (Figure 5.8) is a network device used to connect different devices through wires. Data arriving on any of the lines are sent out on all the others. The limitation of hub 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 is that if data from two devices come at the same time, they will collide. Figure 5.8: A network hub with 8 ports 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   143 10/9/2020   12:57:52 PM 144 InformatIcs PractIces notes 5.3.5 Switch A switch is a networking device (Figure 5.9) that plays a central role in a Local Area Network (LAN). Like a hub, a network switch is used to connect multiple computers or communicating devices. When data arrives, the switch extracts the destination address from the data packet and looks it up in a table to see where to send the packet. Thus it sends signals to only selected devices instead of sending to all. It can forward multiple packets at the same time. A switch does not forward the signals which are noisy or corrupted. It drops such signals and asks the sender to resend it. Figure 5.9: Cables connected to a network switch Ethernet	switches	are	common	in	homes	and	offices to connect multiple devices, thus creating LANs or to access the Internet. 5.3.6 Router A router (Figure 5.10) is a network device that can receive the data, analyse it and transmit it to other networks. A router connects a local area network to the internet. Compared to a hub or a switch, a router has advanced capabilities as it can analyse the data being carried over a network, decide or alter how it is packaged, and send it to another network of a different type. For example, data has been divided into packets of a certain size. Suppose, these packets are to be carried over a different type of network which cannot handle bigger packets, in such a case, the data is to be repackaged as smaller packets and then sent over the network by a router. 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   144 10/9/2020   12:57:53 PM Internet and Web 145 Figure 5.10: A Router An Internet service provider (ISP) is any A router can be wired or wireless. A wireless router organisation that can provide Wi-Fi access to smartphones and other provides services for accessing the Internet. devices. Usually, such routers also contain some ports to provide wired Internet access. These days, home Wi-Fi routers perform the dual task of a router and a modem or switch. These routers connect to incoming broadband lines, from ISP (Internet Service Provider), and convert them to digital data for computing devices to process. 5.3.7 Gateway As the term “Gateway” suggests, it is a key access point that acts as a “gate” between an organisation's network and the outside world of the Internet (Figure 5.11). Gateway serves as the entry and exit point of a network, as all data coming in or going out of a network must first	pass	through	the	gateway	in	order	to	use	routing paths. Besides routing data packets, gateways also maintain information about the host network's internal connection	 paths	 and	 the	 identified	 paths	 of	 other remote networks. If a node from one network wants to communicate with a node of a foreign network, it will pass the data packet to the gateway, which then routes it to the destination using the best possible route. For simple Internet connectivity at homes, the gateway is usually the Internet Service Provider that Activity 5.3 provides access to the entire Internet. Generally, a router Find and list a few is	configured	to	work	as	a	gateway	device	in	computer	 ISPs in your region. networks.  A gateway can be implemented as  software, hardware, or a combination of both. This is because a 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   145 10/9/2020   12:57:53 PM 146 InformatIcs PractIces network gateway is placed at the edge of a network and the	firewall	is	usually	integrated	with	it. 10.0.0.0/8 Server GATEWAY Server 20.0.0.0/8 IP ADDRESS IP ADDRESS PC 4 PC 5 PC 4 PC 5 PC 1 PC 2 PC 3 PC 1 PC 2 PC 3 Figure 5.11: A network gateway 5.4 networkIng topologIes We have already discussed that a number of computing devices are connected together to form a Local Area Network (LAN), and interconnections among millions of LANs forms the Internet. The arrangement of computers and other peripherals in a network is called its topology. Common network topologies are mesh, ring, bus, star and tree. 5.4.1 Mesh Topology In this networking topology, each communicating device is connected with every other device in the network as shown in Figure 5.12. Such a network can handle large amounts	 of	 traffic	 since	multiple	 nodes	 can	 transmit data simultaneously. Also, such networks are more reliable in the sense that even if a node gets down, it does not cause any break in the transmission of data between other nodes. This topology is also more secure as compared to other topologies because each cable between two nodes carries different data. However, 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   146 10/9/2020   12:57:54 PM Internet and Web 147 wiring is complex and cabling cost is high in creating such networks, and there are many redundant or unutilised connections. Figure 5.12: A mesh topology 5.4.2 Ring Topology To build a fullyIn ring topology, each node is connected to two other connected mesh devices, one each on either side, as shown in Figure topology of n nodes, 5.13. The nodes connected with each other thus form a it requires n(n-1)/2 ring. The link in a ring topology is unidirectional. Thus, wires. data can be transmitted in one direction only (clockwise or counterclockwise). Figure 5.13: A ring topology 5.4.3 Bus Topology In bus topology (Figure 5.14), each communicating device connects to a transmission medium, known as bus. Data sent from a node are passed on to the bus and hence are transmitted to the length of the bus in both directions. That means data can be received by any of the nodes connected to the bus. Bus Figure 5.14: A bus topology In this topology, a single backbone wire called bus is shared among the nodes, which makes it cheaper and easy to maintain. Both ring and bus topologies are considered to be less secure and less reliable. 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   147 10/9/2020   12:57:54 PM 148 InformatIcs PractIces Think and Reflect 5.4.4 Star Topology In star topology, each communicating device is connected How will a bus and to a central node, which is a networking device like a ring topology behave in case a node is down? hub or a switch, as shown in Figure 5.15. Star	 topology	 is	 considered	 very	 effective,	 efficient and fast as each device is directly connected with the central device. Although disturbance in one device will not affect the rest of the network, any failure in the central networking device may lead to the failure of complete network. Figure 5.15:  A star topology The central node can be either a broadcasting device means data will be transmitted to all the nodes in the network, or a unicast device means the node can identify the destination and forward data to that node only. 5.4.5 Tree or Hybrid Topology It is a hierarchical topology, in which there are multiple branches and each branch can have one or more basic topologies like star, ring and bus. Such topologies are usually realised in WANs where multiple LANs are connected. Those LANs may be in the form of ring, bus or star. In Figure 5.16, a hybrid topology is shown connecting 4 star topologies in bus. In this type of network, data transmitted	 from	 source	 first reaches the centralised device and from there the data passes through Figure 5.16: A hybrid topology every branch where each branch can have link for more nodes. 5.5 the Internet The Internet is the global network of computing devices including desktop, laptop, servers, tablets, mobile phones, other handheld devices as well as peripheral devices such as printers, scanners, etc. In addition, it 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   148 10/9/2020   12:57:54 PM Internet and Web 149 also consists of networking devices such as routers, notes switches, gateways, etc. Today, smart electronic appliances like TV, AC, refrigerator, fan, light, etc., can also communicate through the Internet. The list of such smart devices are always increasing e.g., drones, vehicles, door lock, security camera, etc. The Internet is evolving everyday. Computers are either connected to a modem through a cable or wirelessly (Wi-Fi). A modem, be it wired or wireless, is connected to a local Internet Service Provider (ISP) who then connects to a national network. Many such ISPs connect together forming a regional network and regional networks connect together forming a national network, and such country-wise networks form the Internet backbone. The Internet today is a widespread network, and its influence	is	no	longer	limited	to	the	technical	fields	of computer communications. It is being used by everyone in the society as is evident from the increasing use of online tools for education, creativity, entertainment, socialisation and e-commerce. 5.6 ApplIcAtIons of Internet Following are some of the broad areas or services provided through Internet: •	 The World Wide Web (WWW) •	 Electronic mail (Email) •	 Chat •	 Voice Over Internet Protocol (VoIP) 5.6.1 The World Wide Web (WWW) The World Wide Web (WWW) or web in short, is an ocean of information, stored in the form of trillions of interlinked web pages and web resources. The resources on the web can be shared or accessed through the Internet. Earlier,	to	access	files	residing	in	different	computers, one had to login individually to each computer through the	Internet.	Besides,	files	in	different	computers	were sometimes	 in	different	 formats,	and	 it	was	difficult	 to understand	each	other’s	files	and	documents.	Sir	Tim Berners-Lee — a British computer scientist invented the revolutionary	World	Wide	Web	in	1990	by	defining	three fundamental technologies that lead to creation of web: 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   149 10/9/2020   12:57:54 PM 150 InformatIcs PractIces •	 HTML — HyperText Markup Language or HTML is a language which is used to design standardised Web Pages so that the Web contents can be read and understood from any computer across the globe. It uses	tags	to	define	the	way	page	content	should	be displayed by the web browser. Basic structure of every webpage is designed using HTML. •	 URI	—	Uniform	Resource	Identifier	or	URI	is	a	unique identifier	 to	 identify	a	 resource	 located	on	 the	web. URI	identifies	a	resource	(hardware	or	software)	either by its location or by its name or by both. URL is Uniform Resource Locator and provides the location and mechanism (protocol) to access the resource. Examples of URI identifying resources using location (i.e., URL) are: https://www.mhrd.gov. in, http://www.ncert.nic.in, http://www.airindia. in, etc. URL is sometimes also called a web address. However, it is not only the domain name, but contains other information that completes a web address, as depicted below: Domain Name http://www.ncert.nic.in/textbook/textbook.htm URL In the above URL, http is the protocol name, it can be https, http, FTP, Telnet, etc. www is a subdomain. ncert.nic.in is the domain name. Search Engine(s) Note: These days it is not mandatory to mention protocol like google. co.in, bing.com, and subdomain while entering a URL. The browser duckduckgo.com, automatically	prefixes	it. in.yahoo.com, etc., •	 HTTP — The HyperText Transfer Protocol is a set can be used to of rules which is used to retrieve linked web pages search and retrieve across the web. It’s more secure and advanced version information when is HTTPS. the address of the Many people confuse the web with the Internet. web page is not The Internet as we know is the huge global network known. of interconnected computers, which may or may not have	 any	 file	 or	 webpage	 to	 share	 with	 the	 world. The web on the other hand is the interlinking of a collection of WebPages on these computers which are accessible over the Internet. WWW today gives users access to a vast collection of information created and 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   150 10/9/2020   12:57:54 PM Internet and Web 151 shared by people across the world. It is today the notes most popular information retrieval system. 5.6.2 Electronic Mail (Email) Email is the short form of electronic mail. It is one of the ways of sending and receiving message(s) using the Internet. An email can be sent anytime to any number of recipients at anywhere. The message can be either text entered directly onto the email application or an attached	file	 (text,	 image	 audio,	 video,	 etc.)	 stored	 on a	secondary	storage.	An	existing	file	can	be	sent	as	an attachment with the email, so no need to type it again. To use email service, one needs to register with an email service provider by creating a mail account. These services may be free or paid. Some of the popular email service providers are Google (gmail), Yahoo (yahoo mail), Microsoft (outlook), etc. However, many organisations nowadays get customised business email addresses for their staff using their own domain name. For example, username@companyname.com. Following are some of the common facilities available for an email user: 1. Creating	 an	 email,	 attaching	 files	 with	 an	 email, saving an email as draft for mailing later. Creating email is also termed as composing. 2. Sending and receiving mail. Same email can be sent to multiple email addresses, simultaneously. 3. Sending the copy of mail, as carbon copy (cc) or blind carbon copy (bcc). 4. Forwarding a received email to other user(s) 5. Filtering spam emails 6. Organising email in folders and sub folders 7. Creating and managing email ids of the people you know. 8. Setting signature/footer to be inserted automatically at the end of each email 9. Printing	emails	using	a	printer	or	saving	as	files. 10. Searching emails using email address or email subject text 5.6.3 Chat Chatting or Instant Messaging (IM) over the Internet means communicating to people at different geographic locations in real time through text message(s). It is a 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   151 10/9/2020   12:57:54 PM 152 InformatIcs PractIces notes forum where multiple people connect to each other, to discuss their common interests. Two individuals can also send messages instantly. The sender types a message and sends it; the receiver immediately receives the message and can read and revert through text message. All this happens in real time, as if the sender and receiver were sitting in the same place. For a successful chat session, the communicating parties should be online simultaneously, and use the same chat application. With ever increasing internet speed, it is now possible to send image, document, audio, video as well through instant messengers. It means, the communicating parties can talk to each other through an audio call or through a video call. Moreover, it is also possible to chat through text, audio and video in a group. Thus, we can have group chat or group calls. Applications such as WhatsApp, Slack, Skype, Yahoo Messenger, Google Talk, Facebook Messenger, Google Hangout, etc., are examples of instant messengers. Some of these applications support instant messaging through all the modes — text, audio and video. 5.6.4 VoIP Voice over Internet Protocol or VoIP, allows us to have voice call (telephone service) over the Internet, i.e., the voice transmission over a computer network rather than through the regular telephone network. It is also known as Internet Telephony or Broadband Telephony. But to avail the phone service over the Internet, we need to have an Internet connection with reasonably good speed. VoIP works on the simple principle of converting the analogue voice signals into digital and then transmitting them over the broadband line. There are two major advantages of a VoIP— •	 These services are either free or very economical, so people use them to save on cost. That is why these days even international calls are being made using VoIP. •	 VoIP call(s) can be received and made using IP phones from any place having Internet access. Hence, VoIP has increased the portability and functionality of the voice calling system. Incoming phone calls can be 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   152 10/9/2020   12:57:54 PM Internet and Web 153 automatically routed to the VoIP phone as soon as it notes is connected to the Internet. The only disadvantage of VoIP is that its call quality is dependent on Internet connection speed. Slow Internet connection will lead to poor quality voice calls. 5.7 websIte Each one of us might have visited one or the other website. A website in general contains information organised in multiple pages about an organisation. A website can also be created for a particular purpose, theme or to provide a service. A website (usually referred to as a site in short) is a collection of web pages related through hyperlinks, and saved on a web server. A visitor navigates from one page to another by clicking on hyperlinks. Also, all the pages of a website are integrated under one domain name and have a common theme and template. For example, the website of NCERT will have all the pages related to NCERT, viz., textbooks, syllabus, events, resource materials, etc., under one domain name and having a common design theme. To access a website, one has to type the address of the website (URL) in the address bar of a browser, and press enter. The home page of the website will be displayed. 5.7.1 Purpose of a Website We are living in an Internet era where the whole world is connected. A website’s purpose is to make the information available to people at large. For example, a company might like to advertise or sell its products, a government organisation may like to publish circulars, float	 tenders,	 invite	applications	or	 get	 feedback	 from various stakeholders. A website is a means that helps to	communicate	with	people	in	a	specific,	transparent and user friendly manner. Therefore, while developing a	website,	the	first	question	to	ask	is	why	the	website	is being created, and what should be its pages so that it serves the required purpose. Basically, a website should be user friendly and provide information to users with minimum efforts. A website should be designed keeping in mind different categories of people that will be visiting the site. Some of the common purposes for which websites are designed are listed below: 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   153 10/9/2020   12:57:54 PM 154 InformatIcs PractIces •	 Selling products and delivering services •	 Posting	and	finding	information	on	the	internet •	 Communicating with each other •	 Entertainment purposes •	 Disseminating contents and software 5.8 web pAge A web page (also referred to as a page) is a document on the WWW that is viewed in a web browser. Basic structure of a web page is created using HTML (HyperText Markup Language) and CSS (Cascaded Style Sheet). A web page is usually a part of a website and may contain information in different forms, such as: Activity 5.4 ●	 text	in	the	form	of	paragraphs,	lists,	tables,	etc. Visit NCERT, SWAYAM ●	 images or any other website ●	 audio and note down URLs ●	 video of	some	of	the	specific pages of that website. ●	 software	application ●	 other	interactive	contents Additionally, various styling and formatting are applied on a web page to make it attractive and organised. Further,	program	codes	called	scripts	are	used	to	define the manner in which the page will behave on different actions. Scripts make a web page interactive. JavaScript is the most popular and commonly used scripting language. However, Python and PHP are also used to apply scripting on a web page. The	first	page	of	the	website	is	called	a	home	page. It generally contains information and links to all the related web pages. Each web page has a unique address that is visible on the address bar. Hence if we want to view a particular web page, its address has to be typed in the address bar of the browser. The web pages that are linked to form a website share a unique domain name. For example, https://swayam.gov.in/ is a website by the Government of India to deliver online courses for School, College and University students and teachers. It is a collection of multiple web pages that link to different courses related information. 5.8.1 Static and Dynamic Web Pages A web page can be static or dynamic. A static webpage is one whose content always remains static, i.e., does not change for person to person. When a web server 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   154 10/9/2020   12:57:54 PM Internet and Web 155 receives a request (from browser) for a static web page, it just locates the page on its storage media and sends it to the browser of the client. No additional processing is performed on the page. Hence, a static web page remains the same for all users until someone changes its code manually. Static web pages are generally written in HTML, JavaScript and/or CSS and have the extension .htm or .html. Web STEP 1: HTTP Request Web Browser Browser STEP 2: HTTP Response Figure 5.17: Working of a static web page On the other hand, a dynamic web page is one in which the content of the web page can be different for different users. The difference in content may be because of different choices made by the user. When a request for a dynamic web page is made to the web server, it does not simply retrieve the page and send. Before sending the requested web page, the server may perform some additional processes like getting information from the database, updating date and time, updating weather information, etc. The content of such pages changes frequently. They are more complex and thus take more time to load than static web pages. Dynamic web pages can be created using various languages such as JavaScript, PHP, ASP.NET, Python, Java, Ruby, etc. These are complex to construct and design, as the code to perform the additional operations has to be added. Such server side code allows the server to change its content each time the page is loaded. Further, most dynamic pages are linked to databases so that each time the page is uploaded, the required information from the databases is retrieved to update the web page. Few common examples of dynamic web pages are those web pages displaying the date, time, and weather report or having e-commerce applications. 2024-25 Chapter 5.indd   155 10/9/2020   12:57:55 PM 156 InformatIcs PractIces STEP 2: Calls an application program in response to the HTTP request. Web STEP 1: HTTP Request Web Browser Browser STEP 4: HTTP Response STEP 3: The program executes and produces HTML output. Figure 5.18: Working of a dynamic web page 5.9 web server A web server is used to store and deliver the contents of a website to clients such as a browser that request it. A web server can be software or hardware. When talking about a web server as  computer hardware, it stores web server software and a website's contents (HTML pages, images, CSS stylesheets, and JavaScript	files).	The	server	needs	 to	be	connected	 to the Internet so that its contents can be made accessible to others. When talking about a web server as a software, it is a specialised program that understands URLs or web addresses coming as requests from browsers, and responds to those requests. The server is assigned a unique domain name so that it can be accessed from anywhere using the domain name. To develop and test a	website	using	a	personal	computer,	we	need	to	first