Unit Five Social and Political Life 84 2024-25 Teacher’s Note This unit discusses the role of the government in providing public facilities as well as in implementing laws that apply to market, factory and  the working conditions of people. The aim is to allow students to understand the ways in which this role of the government is linked to concerns addressed in our Fundamental Rights. It is this link to rights that provides a connection to similar issues raised in earlier chapters. Also the discussion in the Class VI and VII textbooks on livelihoods and markets respectively can also be used to provide a context for discussions in Chapter 8. Chapter 7 uses water as the primary example to discuss public facilities. It is important that the student understand quite clearly what is meant by the idea of public facilities and why the government needs to play a crucial role in their provision and, therefore, take overall responsibility. The idea of equity, or the equal availability, affordability and quality of water for all, is one of the key issues related to public facilities that the chapter highlights. In the classroom discussion, it is crucial to separate the discussion on the importance of the government’s role in providing public facilities from their current unequal provision. This means that the fact that persons currently get different amounts of water should not be viewed as a reason for the government not being able to provide public facilities. Chapter 8 discusses the central role of the government in regulating economic activities. This is largely done through laws and the chapter focuses on the importance of implementing existing laws as well as making new laws to protect the rights of workers, consumers and producers in the market. The Bhopal gas tragedy is discussed as an example of the lax enforcement of the laws. It is quite likely that students might have not heard of this tragedy and it would be helpful to have them research this and perhaps create a wallpaper or skit on this for the entire school. The websites indicated at the end of the book could be used for additional reference material. The Bhopal gas tragedy also marked the moment in which ‘environmental’ issues became intrinsically linked to laws on the economy and the chapter briefly discusses this as well. The idea of accountability of the manufacturer as well as the government to the workers and the citizens at large is one of the key ideas underlying this chapter. 85 2024-25 Economic Presence of the Government Public Facilities Chapter 7 ANNA NAGAR Ramagopal Amu and Kumar are travelling through Chennai in a bus. As they go round the city, they observe the water facilities available in SAIDAPET different parts of Chennai... Padma Social and Political Life 86 2024-25 MADIPAKKAM Siva MYLAPORE Subramanian 87 2024-25 Public Facilities Water and the People of Chennai Senior government officials like Mr Ramagopal live in Anna Nagar, Chennai. This area looks lush and green with lawns maintained by a generous spraying of water. Bungalows here have tap water for major part of the day. On days when the water supply is inadequate, Mr Ramagopal speaks to a senior official whom he knows in the municipal water board and a water tanker is easily arranged for his house. Like most areas of  the city, Subramanian’s apartments in Mylapore suffers from water shortage. This area gets municipal water once in two days. A private borewell meets 1. You have seen the four some of the residents’ water needs. Borewell water is, situations illustrated above. however, brackish so the residents use it in their toilets Based on these, what and for washing. For other uses, water is purchased from impression do you get of the tankers. Subramanian spends upto Rs 500-600 per month water situation in Chennai? on buying water from the tankers. For drinking water, 2. Pick out the various sources residents have installed water purification systems in their of water for household use homes. from the description alongside. 3. What, in your view, is similar, Siva lives on rent on the first floor of a house in Madipakkam and what is different in and gets water once in four days. Shortage of water is one Subramanian’s and Padma’s major reason why Siva can’t bring his family to Chennai. experiences. For drinking, Siva buys bottled water. 4.  Write a paragraph describing the water supply Padma works as a domestic help in Saidapet and lives in situation in your area. the nearby slum. She pays a rent of Rs 650 for the hutment, 5. Why does water flow in a which has neither a bathroom nor a tap connection. For 30 trickle in summer in most places such hutments there is a common tap at one corner, in which in India? Find out. water comes from a borewell for 20 minutes twice daily. A Discuss: Is there a general family gets to fill a maximum of three buckets within this shortage of water for everyone time. The same water is used for washing and drinking. In in Chennai? Can you think of summer, the flow becomes a trickle, so that one family gets two reasons why different water only at the cost of another. People have to wait long people get varying amounts of water? hours for water tankers. Social and Political Life 88 2024-25 Water as Part of the Fundamental Right to Life Water is essential for life and for good health. Not only is it necessary for us to be able to meet our daily needs but safe drinking water can prevent many water-related diseases. India has one of the largest number of cases of diseases such as diarrhoea, dysentery, cholera. Over 1,600 Indians, most of them children below the age of  five, reportedly die everyday because of  water-related diseases. These deaths can be prevented if   people have access to safe drinking water. The Constitution of India recognises the right to water as being a part of the Right to Life under Article 21. This means that it is the right of every person, whether rich or poor, to have sufficient amounts of water to fulfil his/her  daily needs at a price that he/she can afford. In other words, there should be universal access to water. There have been several court cases in which both the High “... right to water entitles Courts and the Supreme Court have held that the right to safe everyone to sufficient, drinking water is a Fundamental Right. In 2007, the Andhra safe, acceptable, Pradesh High Court restated this while hearing a case based physically accessible and on a letter written by a villager of Mahbubnagar district on affordable water for the contamination of  drinking water. The villager’s complaint personal and domestic was that a textile company was discharging poisonous chemicals use” United Nations (2002) into a stream near his village, contaminating ground water, which was the source for irrigation and drinking water. The judges directed the Mahbubnagar district collector to supply 25 litres of water to each person in the village. Public Facilities Like water, there are other essential facilities that need to be provided for everyone. Last year you read about two other such facilities: healthcare and sanitation. Similarly, there are things like electricity, public transport, schools and colleges that are also necessary. These are known as public facilities. Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) www.in.undp.org 89 Chapter 7: Public Facilities 2024-25 The important characteristic of a public facility is that once it is provided, its benefits can be shared by many people. For instance, a school in the village will enable many children to get educated. Similarly, the supply of  electricity to an area can be useful for many people: farmers can run pumpsets to irrigate their fields, people can open small workshops that run on electricity, students will find it easier to study and most people in the village will benefit in some way or the other. The Government’s Role Given that public facilities are so important, someone must carry the responsibility of providing these to the people. This ‘someone’ is the government. One of the most important functions of the government is to ensure that these public facilities are made available to everyone. Let us try and understand why the The Indian Constitution guarantees the Right to government (and only the government) must bear this Education for all children between the ages of responsibility. 6-14 years. Equity in the schooling facilities available to all children is an important aspect of this Right. However, activists and scholars We have seen that private companies operate for profit in working on education have documented the the market. You read about this in the chapter on fact that schooling in India continues to be the ‘Story of a Shirt’ in your Class VII book. In most of highly unequal. the public facilities, there is no profit to be had. For example, what profit can accrue to a company for keeping the drains clean or running an anti-malaria campaign? A private company will probably not be interested in undertaking such work. But, for other public facilities such as schools and hospitals, private companies may well be interested. We have many of these, particularly in large cities. Similarly, if you are living in a city, you will have seen private companies supplying water through tankers or supplying drinking water in sealed bottles. In such cases, private companies provide public facilities but at a price that only some people can afford. Hence, this facility is not available to all at an affordable rate. If we go by the rule that people will get as much as they can pay for then many people who cannot The government needs to play an active role in providing adequate access to proper health facilities for the entire afford to pay for such facilities will be deprived of the population. This includes the eradication of preventable opportunity to live a decent life. diseases like polio as shown in the above photograph. Social and Political Life 90 2024-25 Clearly, this is not a desirable option. Public facilities relate to As Amu and Kumar ride people’s basic needs. Any modern society requires that these around Chennai... facilities are provided so that people’s basic needs are met. The Right to Life that the Constitution guarantees is for all persons living in this country. The responsibility to provide public facilities, therefore, must be that of the government. Where does the government get money for public facilities? Every year you must have heard the government budget being presented in the Parliament. This is an account of the expenses the government has made on its programmes in Amu: Did you notice that the the past year and how much it plans to spend in the coming roads in Saidapet were so bumpy year. and without streetlights? I wonder what the place is like at In the budget, the government also announces the various night. ways in which it plans to meet these expenses. The main source of revenue for the government is the taxes collected Kumar: What better can you from the people, and the government is empowered to expect in a slum! collect these taxes and use them for such programmes. For Amu: Why should slums be like instance, to supply water, the government has to incur costs that? Shouldn’t they have public in pumping water, carrying it over long distances, laying facilities? down pipes for distribution, treating the water for Kumar: I think public facilities impurities, and finally, collecting and treating waste water. are for all those who live in It meets these expenses partly from the various taxes that proper houses in colonies. They it collects and partly by charging a price for water. This price are the people who pay taxes. is set so that most people can afford a certain minimum amount of water for daily use. Amu: Why do you say that! Slum dwellers are also citizens and Central Government Spends Money on they have rights too. Rupee Goes To Kumar: Arrey! The government Pensions (4%) will go bankrupt this way! Amu: Well, it has to find a way. Other Expenditure Interest Payments Can you imagine what it would (9%) (20%) be like to live in a slum without proper roads, water, electricity? Centrally Sponsored Scheme Kumar: Err…. (8%) Amu: Our Constitution recognises Finance Commission and other Transfers ` Central many of the public facilities as (8%) Sector Scheme being a part of the Right to Life. (16%) The government must see that these rights are protected so that States’ share of Subsidies everyone can lead a decent life. taxes & duties (6%) (20%) Defence Whose point of view do you (8%) Source: Union Budget 2024-25 agree with? 91 Chapter 9: Public Facilities 2024-25 1. What are public facilities? Why should the government be responsible for providing public facilities? 2. The government can get private companies to deliver some of the public facilities. For instance, contracts for building roads are given to private contractors. Distribution of electricity in Delhi is done by two private companies. However, the government must keep a close watch on these and ensure that they fulfil their commitment to rQeach these facilities to all people and at affordable prices. Why do you think the government must assume the overall responsibility for public facilities even when it gets private companies to do part of the job? 3. Look at your water bill and find out what the minimum rate is for municipal water in your area. Does the rate increase as the use of water increases? Why do you think the government charges a higher rate for greater use of water? 4. Find out the various kinds of taxes people pay to the government by talking to a salaried person, a person running his or her own factory/business and a shopkeeper. Share your findings in the classroom with your teacher. Tax Revenue of Central Government Rupee Comes From Income Tax Borrowings and (19%) other Liabilities (28%) Union Excise Duties (5%) ` Non-Tax Revenue (7%) Non-debt Capital Corporation Customs Receipts Tax (4%) (1%) (17%) GST and other taxes (18%) Source: Union Budget 2024-25 Buses are the most important forms of public transport over short distances. It is the main link to the workplace for majority of the working people. With rapid urbanisation, the public bus system even in the major cities has not been able to keep up with the demand. As an alternative, the government has planned ambitious metro rail projects for Delhi and other metropolitan cities. Rs 11,000 crore was spent from the government budget for the construction of the first segment of the metro-rail in Delhi using the latest technology. People have pointed out that this massive expenditure could have been avoided if only a fraction of this amount was spent on upgrading the public bus system. Would you agree? What do you think could be the solution for other regions of India? Social and Political Life 92 2024-25 Water Supply to Chennai: Is it Available to All? While there is no doubt that public facilities should be made available to all, in reality we see that there is a great shortage of such facilities. In the rest of this chapter, we will read about the provision of water, which as we have seen, is a public facility of great importance. Water supply in Chennai, as we saw at the beginning of the chapter, is marked by shortages. Municipal supply meets only about half the needs of the people of the city, on an average. There are areas which get water more regularly than others. Those areas that are close to the storage points get more water whereas colonies further away receive less water. The burden of shortfalls in water supply falls mostly on the poor. The middle class, when faced with water shortages, are able to cope through a variety of private means such as digging borewells, buying water from tankers In rural areas, water is needed both for human use and for use by the cattle. The sources of and using bottled water for drinking. water are wells, handpumps, ponds and sometimes overhead tanks. Much of these are Apart from the availability of water, access to ‘safe’ privately owned. Compared to the urban areas, drinking water is also available to some and this depends there is an even greater shortage of public water supply in rural areas. on what one can afford. Once again, the wealthy have more choices, thanks to the booming market in bottled water and water purifiers. People who can afford it have safe drinking water, whereas the poor are again left out. In reality, therefore, it seems that it is only people with money who have the right to water – a far cry from the goal of universal access to ‘sufficient and safe’ water. Taking water from farmers The shortage of water has opened up opportunities for private companies in a big way. Many private companies are providing water to cities by buying it from places around the city. In Chennai, water is taken from nearby towns like Mamandur, Palur, Karungizhi and from villages to the north of the city using a fleet of over 13,000 water tankers. Every month the water dealers pay farmers an advance for the rights to exploit water sources on their land. This is water taken away not just from agriculture but also from the drinking water supplies of the villagers. Ground water levels have dropped drastically in all these towns and villages as a result. 93 Chapter 7: Public Facilities 2024-25 In Search of Alternatives The situation in Chennai is not unique. A similar scenario of shortages and acute crisis during the summer months is common to other cities of India. The shortage in municipal water is increasingly being filled by an expansion of private companies who are selling water for profit. Also common are the great inequalities in water use. The supply of water per person in an urban area in India should be about 135 litres Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) per day (about seven buckets) – a standard set by the Urban www.in.undp.org Water Commission. Whereas people in slums have to make do with less than 20 litres a day per person (one bucket), people living in luxury hotels may consume as much as 1,600 litres (80 buckets) of  water per day. A shortage of municipal water is often taken as a sign of failure Discuss: Do you think this of the government. Some people argue that since the would be a right step? What do you think would happen if the government is unable to supply the amount of water that is government withdraws from needed and many of the municipal water departments are the task of supplying water? running at a loss, we should allow private companies to take over the task of  water supply. According to them, private companies can perform better. Consider the following facts: 1. Throughout the world, water supply is a function of the government. There are very few instances of private water supply. Public Water Supply in Porto Alegre Porto Alegre is a city in Brazil. Though there are many poor people in this city, what is remarkable is that it has a far lower number of infant deaths as compared to most other cities of the world. The city’s water department has achieved universal access to safe water and this is the main reason behind the lower number of infant deaths. The average price of water is kept low, and the poor are charged half the basic rate. Whatever profit the department makes is used to improve the water supply. The working of the water department is transparent and people can have a direct say in deciding which projects the department should take up. Through a process of public meetings, people hear what the managers have to say and also vote on their priorities. Social and Political Life 94 2024-25 2. There are areas in the world where public water supply has achieved universal access. (see Box below) 3. In a few cases, where the responsibility for water supply was handed over to private companies, there was a steep rise in the price of  water, making it unaffordable for many. Cities saw huge protests, with riots breaking out in places like Bolivia, forcing the government to take back the service from private hands. Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) www.in.undp.org 4. Within India, there are cases of success in government water Discuss the main ideas in the departments, though these are few in number and limited to above section. What do you certain areas of their work. The water supply department in think can be done to improve water supply? Mumbai raises enough money through water charges to cover its expenses on supplying water. In Hyderabad, a report Do you think it is also shows that the department has increased coverage and important to conserve resources like water and improved performance in revenue collection. In Chennai, electricity, and to use more the department has taken several initiatives for harvesting public transport? rain water to increase the level of  groundwater. It has also used the services of  private companies for transporting and distributing water but the government water supply department decides the rate for water tankers and gives them permission to operate. Hence they are called ‘on contract’. Mumbai’s suburban railway is well-functioning public transport system. It is the densest route in the world, attending to 65 lakh passengers daily. Extending over a distance of 300 kilometers, these local trains allow people living far away from Mumbai to find work in the city. Note that the high cost of housing in cities makes it impossible for an average worker to live in the city. 95 Chapter 7: Public Facilities 2024-25 Extending Sanitation Facilities “‘Latrines for us!’ they exclaimed in astonishment. ‘We go and perform our functions out in the open.’ Latrines are for you big people.” Mahatma Gandhi recounting untouchables’ grievances, Rajkot Sanitation Committee, 1896 Besides safe drinking water, sanitation is a must in prevention of water-borne diseases. However, the sanitation coverage in India is even lower than that of water. Official figures for 2011 show that 87 percent of the households in India have access to drinking water and about 53 percent have access to sanitation (toilet facilities within the premises of residence). Once again, it is the poor both in the rural and urban areas who lack access to sanitation. Sulabh, a non-government organisation, has been working for nearly five decades to address the problems of sanitation facing low-caste, low-income people in India. It has constructed more than 8,500 community toilet blocks and 1.5 million household toilets, giving access to sanitation to 20 million people. The majority of the users of Sulabh facilities are from the poor working class. Sulabh enters into contracts with municipalities or other local authorities to construct toilet blocks with government funds. Local authorities provide land and funds for setting up the services, whereas maintenance costs are sometimes financed through user charges (for example, `2 is charged for use of the latrines in the cities). Next time you see a Sulabh toilet, you might want to find out yourself how it functions! Do you think that lack of access to proper sanitation facilities affects peoples’ lives? How? Why do you think that this would impact women and girls more acutely? Social and Political Life 96 2024-25 The rural household electrification stands at 96 percent in 2022. (Source: National Family Health Survey (NFHS–5), 2019–22) Conclusion Public facilities relate to our basic needs and the Indian Constitution recognises the right to water, heath, education etc as being a part of the Right to Life. Thus one of the major roles of the government is to ensure adequate public facilities for everyone. But, progress on this front has been far from satisfactory. There is a shortage in supply and there are inequalities in distribution. Compared to the metros and large cities, towns and villages are under-provided. Compared to wealthy localities, the poorer localities are under-serviced. Handing over these facilities to private companies may not be the answer. Any solution needs to take account of the important fact that every citizen of the country has a right to these facilities which should be provided to her/him in an equitable manner. 97 Chapter 9: Public Facilities 2024-25 Exercises 1. Why do you think there are so few cases of private water supply in the world? 2. Do you think water in Chennai is available to and affordable by all? Discuss. 3. How is the sale of water by farmers to water dealers in Chennai affecting the local people? Do you think local people can object to such exploitation of ground water? Can the government do anything in this regard? 4. Why are most of the private hospitals and private schools located in major cities and not in towns or rural areas? 5. Do you think the distribution of public facilities in our country is adequate and fair? Give an example of your own to explain. 6. Take some of the public facilities in your area, such as water, electricity, etc. Is there scope to improve these? What in your opinion should be done? Complete the table. Is it available? How can it be improved? Water Electricity Roads Public Transport 7. Are the above public facilities shared equally by all the people in your area? Elaborate. 8. Data on some of the public facilities are collected as part of the Census. Discuss with your teacher when and how the Census is conducted. 9. Private educational institutions – schools, colleges, universities, technical and vocational training institutes are coming up in our country in a big way. On the other hand, educational institutes run by the government are becoming relatively less important. What do you think would be the impact of this? Discuss. Social and Political Life 98 2024-25 GLOSSARY Sanitation: Provision of facilities for the safe disposal of human urine and faeces. This is done by construction of toilets and pipes to carry the sewerage and treatment of waste water. This is necessary so as to avoid contamination. Company: A company is a form of business set up by people or by the government. Those that are promoted and owned by individuals or groups are called private companies. For example, Tata Steel is a private company whereas Indian Oil is a company run by the government. Universal access: Universal access is achieved when everyone has physical access to a good and can also afford it. For instance, a tap connection at home will allow physical access to water, and if the price of water is low or is provided free, everyone will be able to afford it. Basic needs: Primary requirements of food, water, shelter, sanitation, healthcare and education necessary for survival. 99 Chapter 7: Public Facilities 2024-25