Confronting Chapter 6 Marginalisation In the previous chapter, we read about two different groups and their experiences of inequality and discrimination. Though powerless, such groups have fought, protested and struggled against being excluded or dominated by others. They have attempted to overcome their situation by adopting a range of strategies in their long history. Religious solace, armed struggle, self improvement and education, economic uplift – there appears to be no one way of doing things. In all cases, the choice of struggle has depended on the circumstances that the marginalised find themselves in. In this chapter, we will read about some of the ways in which groups and individuals challenge existing inequalities. Adivasis, Dalits, Muslims, women and other marginal groups argue that simply by being citizens of a democratic country, they possess equal rights that must be respected. Many among them look up to the Constitution to address their concerns. In this chapter, we will see why the Constitution of India is something that marginalised groups invoke in the course of their struggles. As part of this, we will look at how rights are translated into laws to protect groups from continued exploitation and we will also look at the government’s efforts to formulate policies to promote the access of these groups to development. Social and Political Life 74 2024-25 Invoking Fundamental Rights The Constitution, as you have learnt in the first chapter of this book, lays down the principles that make our society and polity democratic. They are defined in and through the list of Fundamental Rights that are an important part of the Constitution. These rights are available to all Indians equally. As far as the marginalised are concerned, they have drawn on these rights in two ways: first, by insisting on their Fundamental Rights, they have forced the government to recognise the injustice done to them. Second, they have insisted that the government enforce these laws. In some instances, the struggles of the marginalised have influenced the government to frame new laws, in keeping with the spirit of the Fundamental Rights. Article 17 of the Constitution states that untouchability has been abolished – what this means is that no one can henceforth prevent Dalits from educating themselves, entering temples, using public facilities etc. It also means that it is wrong to practise untouchability and that this practice will not be tolerated by a democratic government.  In fact, untouchability is a punishable crime now. There are other sections in the Constitution that help to strengthen the argument against untouchability – for example, Article 15 of the Constitution notes that no citizen of India shall be discriminated against on the basis of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth (you learnt a lot about this in your Class VII textbook in the chapter On Equality in Indian Democracy). This has been used by Dalits to seek equality where it has been denied to them. 75 Chapter 6: Confronting Marginalisation 2024-25 Confronting Marginalisation Therefore, Dalits can ‘invoke’ or ‘draw on’ a Fundamental The poem below is written by Soyrabai, the wife of the well- Right (or Rights) in situations where they feel that they known Bhakti poet Chokhamela have been treated badly by some individual or community, from fourteenth century or even by the government. They have drawn the attention Maharashtra. They belonged to of the government of India to the Constitution, demanding the Mahar caste, which was at that the government abide by it and do justice to them. that time considered untouchable. Likewise, other minority groups have drawn on the Fundamental Rights section of our Constitution. They have A body is unclean, they say particularly drawn upon the right to freedom of religion and cultural and educational rights. In the case of cultural Only the soul is untainted and educational rights, distinct cultural and religious groups But the impurity of the body like the Muslims and Parsis have the right to be the Is born within the body guardians of the content of their culture, as well as the right …By which ritual does the body to make decisions on how best this content is to be become pure? preserved. Thus, by granting different forms of cultural Not a creature has been born rights, the Constitution tries to ensure cultural justice to except in a bloody womb. such groups. The Constitution does this so that the culture This is the glory of God, of these groups is not dominated nor wiped out by the Defilement exists within. culture of the majority community. The body is polluted from within, Be sure of it says the Mahari Laws for the Marginalised Chokha Quoted in Uma Chakravarti, Gendering Caste: Through a As you have read, the government makes laws to protect Feminist Lens, Stree, 2003, p. 99 its citizens. Yet, this is not the only way in which it takes action. There are specific laws and policies for the Soyrabai is questioning the idea marginalised in our country. There are policies or  schemes of purity and arguing that since that emerge through other means like setting up a every human is born in the same committee or by undertaking a survey etc. The government manner, there is nothing that then makes an effort to promote such policies in order to makes one body less or more give opportunities to specific groups. pure than the other. She is possibly also trying to say that Promoting Social Justice pollution, a key tool of the caste system to separate or deny As part of their effort to implement the Constitution, both people access to spaces, work, state and central governments create specific schemes for knowledge and dignity, occurs implementation in tribal areas or in areas that have a high not through the nature of work Dalit population. For example, the government provides for done, but ‘from within’- from your thoughts, values and free or subsidised hostels for students of Dalit and Adivasi beliefs. communities so that they can avail of education facilities that may not be available in their localities. Social and Political Life 76 2024-25 In addition to providing certain facilities, the government also operates through laws to ensure that concrete steps are taken to end inequity in the system. One such law/policy is the reservation policy that today is both significant and highly contentious. The laws which reserve seats in education and government employment for Dalits and Adivasis are based on an important argument- that in a society like ours, where for centuries sections of the population have been denied opportunities to learn and to work in order to develop new skills or vocations, a democratic government needs to step in and assist these sections. How does the reservation policy work? Governments across India have their own list of Scheduled Castes (or Dalits), Scheduled Tribes and backward and most backward castes. The central government too has its list. Students applying to educational institutions and those applying for posts in government are expected to furnish proof of their caste or tribe status, in the form of caste and tribe certificates. (Many government and educational institutions also ask for candidates to mention their caste/tribe status.) If a particular Dalit caste or a certain tribe is on the government list, then a candidate from that caste or tribe can avail of the benefit of reservation. For admission to colleges, especially to institutes of State one reason why you professional education, such as medical colleges, governments think reservations play an define a set of ‘cut-off’ marks. This means that not all Dalit important role in providing social justice to Dalits and and tribal candidates can qualify for admission, but only those Adivasis. who have done reasonably well and secured marks above the cut-off point. Governments also offer special scholarships for these students. In your Class IX Political Science textbook, you will read more on reservations for the backward classes. List of schemes What is this How do you think it will help promote scheme about? social justice? Scholarships for students Special police stations Special schemes for girls in government schools Q 77 Chapter 6: Confronting Marginalisation 2024-25 Protecting the Rights of Dalits and Adivasis In addition to policies our country also has specific laws that guard against the discrimination and exploitation of marginalised communities. Let us read the following casestudy, adapted from a real-life account, to understand how You may have read Kabir’s Dalits use the protection that laws provide. poems in your language textbooks. Kabir was a fifteenth The villagers of Jakmalgur are gearing up for a big festival. century poet and weaver who Once in five years, the local deity is honoured and priests also belonged to the Bhakti tradition. Kabir’s poetry spoke from 20 neighbouring villages come for this five-day event. about his love for the supreme The ceremony begins with a member of the Dalit community being free of ritual and priests. washing the feet of all the priests and then bathing in the It also expresses his sharp and water used for this. In Jakmalgur, the person who performed pointed criticism of those he this task belonged to Rathnam’s family. His father and saw as powerful. Kabir attacked those who attempted to define grandfather had both performed the same task before him. individuals on the basis of their Though they were never allowed to enter the temple, this religious and caste identities. ritual was viewed as a great honour bestowed on them on In his view every person had this special occasion. Now it was Rathnam’s turn. Rathnam the ability to reach the highest was all of 20 years, studying engineering in a nearby college. level of spiritual salvation and deep knowledge within He refused to perform the ritual. themselves through their own He said that he had no faith in this practice and that his experience. His poetry brings out the powerful idea of the family members were forced to perform this ritual because equality of all human beings they were Dalits. Rathnam’s refusal angered both the and their labour. He writes powerful castes in the village and some families from his about valuing the work of the own community. The powerful castes were shocked that ordinary potter, the weaver and the woman carrying the water such a young boy had the guts to refuse.  They believed pot – labour that in his poetry that it was Rathnam’s education which allowed him to becomes the basis of imagine that he could start comparing himself with them. understanding the entire universe. His direct, courageous Those from Rathnam’s own caste were fearful of angering challenge inspired many and the powerful. Many worked on their fields as daily-wage even today Kabir’s poetry is labourers. If the dominant castes decided to not call them, sung and appreciated by Dalits, then what would they earn? How would they survive? They marginalised groups and those critical of social hierarchies in also declared that the wrath of the local deity would strike U.P., Rajasthan, Punjab, Madhya them if they refused to give in. Rathnam argued that given Pradesh, Bengal, Bihar and that not a single Dalit had ever entered the temple, how Gujarat. could the deity be angry with them? Social and Political Life 78 2024-25 The powerful castes decided to teach Rathnam a lesson. His In your opinion does the force community was ordered to ostracise him and his family, put on Rathnam to perform this ritual violate his and everyone was told that no one should speak or do any Fundamental Rights? work for them or with them. One night some men entered their part of the village and set his hut on fire. He managed Why do you think the Dalit to escape with his mother. Rathnam, then went to file a families were afraid of angering the powerful castes? case in the local police station under the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989. Other Dalit families still did not come out in his support as they were scared that a similar fate might await them if they spoke out. The case was picked up by the local media that led to many journalists visiting the village. Rathnam was written about as a symbol of Dalit action. The ritual was called off, but his family was forced to move out as they continued to be ostracised by the powerful castes in the village. The Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 Rathnam sought the support of law, filing his complaint under the above Act to protest against the domination and violence of the powerful castes in his village. This Act was framed in 1989 in response to demands made by Dalits and others that the government must take seriously the ill treatment and humiliation Dalits and tribal groups face in an everyday sense. While such treatment had persisted for a long time, it had acquired a violent character in the late 1970s and 1980s. During this period, in parts of southern India, a number of assertive Dalit groups came into being and asserted their rights – they refused to perform their so-called caste duties and insisted on being treated equally; like Rathnam they refused to follow practices located in the humiliation and exploitation of Dalits. This resulted in the more powerful castes unleashing violence against them. In order to indicate to the government that untouchability was still being practised and in the most hideous manner, Dalit groups demanded new laws that would list the various sorts of violence against dalits and prescribe stringent punishment for those who indulge in them. 79 Chapter 6: Confronting Marginalisation 2024-25 Likewise, throughout the 1970s and 1980s Adivasi people Pandit, Look in your heart for knowledge successfully organised themselves and demanded equal Tell me where untouchability rights and for their land and resources to be returned to Came from, since you believe in it. them. They too had to face the anger of powerful social Mix red juice, white juice and air groups and were subject to a great deal of violence. A body bakes in a body … This is why this Act contains a very long list of crimes, We eat by touching, we wash some of which are too horrible even to contemplate. The by touching, from a touch Act does not only describe terrible crimes, but also lets the world was born. people know what dreadful deeds human beings are capable So who’s untouched, asks Kabir? of. In this sense, laws such as these seek to both punish as Only she well as influence the way we think and act. Who is free from delusion The Act distinguishes several levels of crimes. Firstly, it lists modes of humiliation that are both physically horrific In this poem, Kabir is challenging and morally reprehensible and seeks to punish those who the priest by directly questioning (i) force a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe at him about where untouchability came from. He to drink or eat any inedible or obnoxious substance; … (iii) asks the priest to look for forcibly removes clothes from the person of a member of a knowledge in his heart and not in Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe or parades him or the scriptures. Kabir goes on to her naked or with painted face or body or commits any describe how every human body is made of blood and air and has similar act which is derogatory to human dignity… spent nine months in the mother’s womb. And that everything in the Secondly, it lists actions that dispossess Dalits and Adivasis world is created by touching of their meagre resources or which force them into something whether it be a pot, a performing slave labour. Thus, the Act sets out to punish human being or a painting. anyone who (iv) wrongfully occupies or cultivates any land He takes the word untouchable owned by, or allotted to, … a member of a Scheduled Caste and gives it a very different or a Scheduled Tribe or gets the land allotted to him meaning. He claims that transferred; untouchability is the highest state of knowledge: it means not be At another level, the Act recognizes that crimes against touched by narrow limiting ideas. Dalit and tribal women are of a specific kind and, therefore, Therefore, Kabir finally turns the idea of untouchability on its seeks to penalise anyone who (xi) assaults or uses force on head- from the lowest to the any woman belonging to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled highest state that a human being Tribe with intent to dishonour her … can achieve! Can you list two different provisions in the 1989 Act? Look up the glossary and write in your own words what you understand by the term ‘morally reprehensible’. Social and Political Life 80 2024-25 The Scourge of Manual Scavenging Manual scavenging refers to the practice of removing human and animal waste/excreta using brooms, tin plates and baskets from dry latrines and carrying it on the head to disposal grounds some distance away. A manual scavenger is the person who does the job of carrying this filth. This job is mainly done by Dalit women and young girls. According to the Andhra Pradesh-based Safai Karamchari Andolan, an organisation working with manual scavengers, there are one lakh persons from Dalit communities who continue to be employed in this job in this country and who work in 26 lakh private and community dry latrines managed by municipalities. Manual scavengers are exposed to subhuman conditions of work and face serious health hazards. They are constantly A manual scavenger at work exposed to infections that affect their eyes, skin, respiratory and gastro-intestinal systems. They get very low wages for the work they perform. Those working in urban municipalities earn ` 200 per day and those working privately are paid much less. As you have read earlier in this book, the practice of untouchability has been abolished by the Indian Constitution. However, manual scavengers in different parts of the country, the Bhangis in Gujarat, Pakhis in Andhra Pradesh and the Sikkaliars in Tamil Nadu, continue to be considered untouchable. They often live in separate settlements on the outskirts of the village and are denied access to the temple, public water facilities etc. In 1993, the government passed the Employment of Manual Members of the Safai Karamchari Andolan demolishing a dry latrine. Scavengers and Construction of Dry Latrines (Prohibition) Act. This law prohibits the employment of manual scavengers as well as the construction of dry latrines. In 2003, the Safai What do you understand by Karamchari Andolan and 13 other organisations and manual scavenging? individuals, including seven scavengers, filed a PIL in the Re-read the list of Supreme Court. The petitioners complained that manual Fundamental Rights provided scavenging still existed and it continued in government on page 14 and list two rights undertakings like the railways. The petitioners sought enforcement of their Fundamental Rights. The court observed that this practice violates? that the number of manual scavengers in India had increased Why did the Safai Karamchari since the 1993 law. It directed every department/ministry of the Andolan file a PIL in 2003? union government and state governments to verify the facts What did they complain about within six months. If manual scavenging was found to exist, in their petition? then the government department has to actively take up a time-bound programme for their liberation and rehabilitation. What did the Supreme Court The Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and do on hearing their case in their Rehabilitation Act came into force on 6 December 2013. 2005? 81 Chapter 6: Confronting Marginalisation 2024-25 Adivasi Demands and the 1989 Act The 1989 Act is important for another reason – Adivasi activists refer to it to defend their right to occupy land that was traditionally theirs. As you read in the previous chapter Adivasis are often unwilling to move from their land and are forcibly displaced. Activists have asked that those who have forcibly encroached upon tribal lands should be punished under this law. They have also pointed to the fact that this Act merely confirms what has already been promised to tribal people in the Constitution – that land belonging to tribal people cannot be sold to or bought by non-tribal people. In cases where this has happened, the Constitution guarantees the right of tribal people to re-possess their land. C.K. Janu, an Adivasi activist, has also pointed out that one of the violators of Constitutional rights guaranteed to tribal The central government passed the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers people are governments in the various states of India – for it (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006. The is they who allow non-tribal encroachers in the form of introduction to the final Act states that this Act is meant to undo the historical injustices timber merchants, paper mills etc, to exploit tribal land, and meted out to forest dwelling populations in not to forcibly evict tribal people from their traditional forests recognising their rights to land and resources. in the process of declaring forests as reserved or as sanctuaries. This Act recognises their right to homestead, cultivable and grazing land and to non-timber She has also noted that in cases where tribals have already forest produce. The Act also points out that been evicted and cannot go back to their lands, they must be the rights of forest dwellers includes conservation of forests and bio-diversity. compensated. That is, the government must draw up plans and policies for them to live and work elsewhere. After all, governments spend large sums of money on building industrial or other projects on lands taken from tribals – so why should they be reluctant to spend even very modest amounts on rehabilitating the displaced? Conclusion As we can see, the existence of a right or a law or even a policy on paper does not mean that it exists in reality. People have had to constantly work on or make efforts to translate these into principles that guide the actions of their fellow citizens or even their leaders. The desire for equality, dignity and respect is not new. It has existed in different forms throughout our history as you have seen in this chapter. Similarly, even in a democratic society, similar processes of struggle, writing, negotiation and organising need to continue. Social and Political Life 82 2024-25 Exercises 1. List two Fundamental Rights in the Constitution that Dalits can draw upon to insist that they be treated with dignity and as equals. Re-read the Fundamental Rights listed on page 14 to help you answer this question. 2. Re-read the story on Rathnam as well as the provisions of the 1989 Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act. Now list one reason why you think he used this law to file a complaint. 3. Why do Adivasi activists, including C.K. Janu, believe that Adivasis can also use this 1989 Act to fight against dispossession? Is there anything specific in the provisions of the Act that allows her to believe this? 4. The poems and the song in this Unit allow you to see the range of ways in which individuals and communities express their opinions, their anger and their sorrow. In class, do the following two exercises: (a) Bring to class a poem that discusses a social issue. Share this with your classmates. Work in small groups with two or more poems to discuss their meaning as well as what the poet is trying to communicate. (b)Identify a marginalised community in your locality. Write a poem, or song, or draw a poster etc to express your feelings as a member of this community. GLOSSARY Assertive: An assertive person or group is one that can express themselves and their views strongly. Confront: To come face to face or to challenge someone or something.  In the context of this chapter, this refers to groups challenging their marginalisation. Dispossessed: To possess is to own something and to be dispossessed is to have to give up ownership or to give up authority. Ostracise: This means to exclude or banish an individual or a group. In the context of this chapter, it refers to a social boycott of an individual and his family. Morally reprehensible: This refers to an act that violates all norms of decency and dignity that a society believes in. It usually refers to a hideous and repugnant act that goes against all the values that a society has accepted. Policy: A stated course of action that provides direction for the future, sets goals to be achieved or lays out principles or guidelines to be followed and acted upon. In this chapter, we have referred to government policies. But other institutions like schools, companies, etc. also have policies. 83 Chapter 6: Confronting Marginalisation 2024-25