5 Human Resources People are a nation’s greatest resource. Nature’s bounty becomes significant only when people find it useful. It is people with their demands and abilities that turn them into ‘resources’. Hence, human resource is the ultimate resource. Healthy, educated and motivated people develop resources as per their requirements. Human resources like other resources are not equally distributed over the world. They differ in their educational levels, age and sex. Their numbers and characteristics also keep changing. There are 500 My village children in my has 1,000 How many school. people. Do you know? people do you Pradhan Mantri think, there are Kaushal Vikas in the whole Yojna (PKVY) was world? started in 2015 aiming to train one There are crore Indian youth 30 children from 2016 to 2020. in my class. The objective of this scheme is to encourage aptitude Around aAa6.6 billion people. How do you towards employable write that in skills by giving numbers? quality training to probable and existing wage earners. 2024-25 Distribution of PoPulation The way in which people are Of every 100 people in the world... spread across the earth surface is known as the pattern of population distribution. More than 90 per cent of the world’s population lives in about 30 per cent of the land surface. The distribution of population in the world is extremely uneven. Some areas are very crowded and some are sparely populated. The crowded areas are south and south east Asia, Europe and north eastern North America. Very few people live in high latitude areas, tropical deserts, high mountains and areas of equatorial forests. live in Asia live in Europe live in Africa Many more people live north of the Equator than south of the Equator. Almost three-quarters of the world’s people live in two live in Central live in Northern live in Oceania continents Asia and Africa. and South America (Australia, New Sixty per cent of the world’s America Zealand and the Pacific island) people stay in just 10 countries. All of them have more than a 100 Fig. 5.1: World population by continents million people. Activity Study Fig. 5.1 and find out : of the world’s total population which continent has — (a) only 5 per cent (b) only 13 per cent (c) only 1 per cent (d) only 12 per cent Fig. 5.2: World’s most populous countries Locate and label these countries on the outline map of the world. Source: Census of India, 2011 Provisional Population Totals, Paper 1 of 2011 India Series 1 Human ResouRces 45 2024-25 Density of PoPulation Do you know? Population density is the number of people living in a Average density of unit area of the earth’s surface. It is normally expressed population in India is 382 persons per as per square km. The average density of population in square km. the  whole world is 51 persons per square km. South Central Asia has the highest density of population followed by East and South East Asia When all the 30 students are Because the size or area of the present, our classroom seems hall is much larger than that of very crowded. But when the the classroom. However, when same class is seated in the all the students of the school school assembly hall, it seems come into the hall, the hall too so open and empty. Why? starts looking crowded. factors affecting Distribution of PoPulation Geographical Factors Topography: People always prefer to live on plains rather than mountains and plateaus because these Activity areas are suitable for farming, manufacturing and Look at Fig 5.2 service activities. The Ganga plains are the most densely and find out: populated areas of the world while mountains like of these countries Andes, Alps and Himalayas are sparsely populated. how many are in Climate: People usually avoid extreme climates that are Asia? Colour them on a world map. very hot or very cold like Sahara desert, polar regions of Russia, Canada and Antarctica. Soil: Fertile soils provide  suitable land for agriculture. Fertile plains such as Ganga and Brahmaputra in India, Hwang-He, Chang Jiang in China and the Nile in Egypt are densely populated. Water: People prefer to live in the areas where fresh water is easily available. The river valleys of the world are densely populated while deserts have spare population. Minerals: Areas with mineral deposits are more populated. Diamond mines of South Africa and discovery of oil in the Middle east lead to settling of people in these areas. Social, Cultural and Economic Factors Social: Areas of better housing, education and health facilities are more densely populated e.g., Pune. 46  ResouRces and development 2024-25 Cultural: Places with religion or cultural significance attract people. Varanasi, Jerusalem and Vatican city Glossary are some examples. Life expectancy Economic: Industrial areas provide employment It is the number opportunities. Large number of people are attracted to of years that an these areas. Osaka in Japan and Mumbai in India are average person can two densely populated areas. expect to live. PoPulation change The population change refers to change in the number of people during a specific time. The world population has not been stable. It has increased manifold as seen in the Fig 5.3. Why?  This is actually due to changes in the number of births and deaths.  For an extremely long period of human history, until the 1800s, the world’s population grew steadily but slowly. Large numbers of babies were born, but they died early too. This was as there were no proper health facilities. Sufficient food was not available for all the people. Farmers were not able to produce enough to meet the food requirements of all the people. As a result the total increase in population was very low. In 1804, the world’s population reached one billion. A hundred and fifty five years later, in 1959, the world’s population reached 3 billion. This is often called population explosion. In 1999, 40 years later, the population doubled to 6 billion. The main reason for this growth was that with better food supplies and medicine, deaths were reducing, while the number of births still remained fairly high. Births are usually measured using the birth rate i.e. the number of live births per 1,000 people. Deaths are usually measured using the death rate i.e. the number of deaths per 1,000 people. Migrations is the movement of people in and out of an area. Births and deaths are the natural causes of population change. The difference between the birth rate and the death rate of a country is called the natural growth rate. The population increase in the world is mainly due to rapid increase in natural growth rate.  Fig 5.3: World Population Growth Human ResouRces 47 2024-25 Po se Population Steady pula Population Increa tion Decrease Polpulation Increase Polpulation steady Polpulation decrease Birth Rate Death Rate Birth Rate Death Rate Birth Rate Death Rate Birth rate more than death Birth rate and death rate same: Death rate more than birth rate: population increase population stays the same rate:population decreases Fig 5.4: Balance of Population Migration is another way by which population size changes. People may move within a country or between countries. Emigrants are people who leave a country; Glossary Immigrants are those who arrive in a country. Immigration Countries like the United States of America and When a person Australia have gained in-numbers by in-migration or enters a new immigration. Sudan is an example of a country that country. has experienced a loss in population numbers due to Emigration out-migration or emigration. When a person leaves a country. The general trend of international migrations is from the less developed nations to the more developed nations in search of better employment opportunities. Within countries large number of people may move from the rural to urban areas in search of employment, education and health facilities. Patterns of PoPulation change Rates of population growth vary across the world (Fig 5.5). Although, the world’s total population is rising rapidly, not all countries are experiencing this growth. Some countries like Kenya have high population growth rates. They had both high birth rates and death rates. Now, with improving health care, death rates have fallen, but birth rates still remain high leading to high growth rates. In other countries like United Kingdom, population growth is slowing because of both low death and low birth rates. 48  ResouRces and development 2024-25 Fig. 5.5: World: Differing rates of population growth PoPulation comPosition How crowded a country is, has little to do with its level of economic development. For example, both Bangladesh and Japan are very densely populated but Japan is far more economically developed than Bangladesh. I tell stories I build To understand the role of to my bridges. people as a resource, we need grandchildren. to know more about their qualities. People vary greatly I take in their age, sex, literacy I sing at care of my level, health condition, weddings. home. occupation and income level. It is essential to understand these characteristics of the people. Population I am researching composition refers to the for medicines to I am a cure cancer. farmer. structure of the population. The composition of Think: Every human being is potential resource for the society. population helps us to know What will be your contribution as a human resource? Human ResouRces 49 2024-25 how many are males or females, which age group they belong to, how educated they are and what type of occupations they are employed in, what their income levels and health conditions are. An interesting way of studying the population composition of a country is by looking at the population pyramid, also called an age-sex pyramid. A population pyramid shows •	 The	 total	 population	 divided	 into	 various	 age groups, e.g., 5 to 9 years, 10 to 14 years. •	 The	percentage	of	the	total	population,	subdivided into males and females, in each of those groups. What is this triangular looking diagram? This is a population pyramid. Fig. 5.6: Population Pyramid Can I play detective and investigate the population of a Sure, let’s study What’s that? country? three countries. It shows the pre-sent number of males and females in a country along with their age groups. 50  ResouRces and development 2024-25 The shape of the population pyramid tells the story of the people living in that particular country. The numbers of children (below 15 years) are shown at the bottom and reflect the level of births. The size of the top shows the numbers of aged people (above 65 years) and reflects the number of deaths. The population pyramid also tells us how many dependents there are in a country. There are two groups of dependents — young dependents (aged below 15 years) and elderly dependents (aged over 65 years). Those of the working age are the economically active. The population pyramid of a country in which birth and death rates bothe are high is broad at the base Fig. 5.7: Population and rapidly narrows towards the top. This is because Pyramid of Kenya although, many children are born, a large percentage of them die in their infancy, relatively few become adults and there are very few old people. This situation is typified by the pyramid shown for Kenya (Fig 5.7). In countries where death rates (especially amongst the very young) are decreasing, the pyramid is broad in the younger Fig. 5.8: Population Pyramid age groups, because of India more infants survive to adulthood. This can be seen in the pyramid for India (Fig 5.8). Such populations contain a relatively large number of young people and which means a strong and expanding labour force. In countries like Japan, low birth rates make the pyramid narrow at the base (Fig 5.9). Decreased death rates allow numbers of people to reach old age. Skilled, spirited and hopeful young people endowed with a positive outlook are the future of any nation. We in India are fortunate to have such a resource. They must be educated and provided skills and opportunities to become able and productive. Fig. 5.9: Population Pyramid of Japan Human ResouRces 51 2024-25 Exercise 1. Answer the following questions. (i) Why are people considered a resource? (ii)  What are the causes for the uneven distribution of population in the world? (iii)  The world population has grown very rapidly. Why? (iv)  Discuss the role of any two factors influencing population change. (v) What is meant by population composition? (vi) What are population pyramids? How do they help in understanding about the population of a country? 2. Tick the correct answer. (i) Which does the term population distribution refer to? (a) How population in a specified area changes over time. (b) The number of people who die in relation to the number of people born in a specified area. (c) The way in which people are spread across a given area. (ii) Which are three main factors that cause population change? (a) Births, deaths and marriage (b) Births, deaths and migration (c) Births, deaths and life expectancy (iii) In 1999, the world population reached (a) 1 billion (b) 3 billion (c) 6 billion (iv) What is a population pyramid? (a) A graphical presentation of the age, sex composition of a population. (b) When the population density of an area is so high that people live in tall buildings. (c) Pattern of population distribution in large urban areas. 3.  Complete the sentences below using some of the following words. sparsely, favourable, fallow, artificial, fertile, natural, extreme, densely When people are attracted to an area it becomes ....................... populated Factors that influence this include ....................... climate; good supplies of ....................... resources and ....................... land. 52  ResouRces and development 2024-25 4. Activity Discuss the characteristics of a society with ‘too many under 15s’ and one with ‘too few under 15s’. Hint : need for schools; pension schemes, teachers, toys, wheel chairs, labour supply, hospitals. Some Internet Sources for More Information www.ndmindia.nic.in www.environmentdefense.org www.freefoto.com www.worldgame.org/worldmeters www.cseindia.org www.mnes.nic.in www.undp.org/popin Human ResouRces 53 2024-25 Notes 2024-25