Land, Soil, Water, Natural Vegetation and Wildlife Resources In a small village in Tanzania, Africa, Mamba gets up very early in the morning to fetch water. She has to walk a long way and returns after a few hours. She then helps Let’s do her mother in the house and joins her brothers in taking Observe the land, care of their goats.  All her family owns is a piece of rocky type of soil and land around their small hut. Mamba’s father can barely water availability grow some maize and beans on it after toiling hard. This in the region you is not enough to feed their family for the whole year. live. Discuss in your class, how it Peter lives in the heart of the sheep rearing region in has influenced the New Zealand where his family runs a wool processing lifestyle of people factory. Everyday when he returns from school, Peter there. watches his uncle taking care of their sheep. Their sheep yard is situated on a wide grassy plain with hills in the far distance. It is managed in a scientific way using the latest technology. Peter’s family also grows vegetables through organic farming. Mamba and Peter stay in two different parts of the world and lead very different lives. This difference is because of the differences in the quality of land, soil, water, natural vegetation, animals and the usage of Do you know? technology. The availability of such resources is the Ninety per cent main reason places differ from each other. of the world population L occupies only and thirty per cent of Land is among the most important natural resources. land area. The It covers only about thirty per cent of the total area of remaining seventy the earth’s surface and all parts of this small percentage per cent of the are not habitable. land is either sparsely populated The uneven distribution of population in different or uninhabited. parts of the world is mainly due to varied characteristics of land and climate. The rugged topography, steep slopes of the mountains, low-lying areas susceptible to water 2024-25 Chapter-2.indd   7 8/17/2022   11:36:42 AM logging, desert areas, thick forested areas are normally sparsely populated or uninhabited. Plains and river valleys offer suitable land for agriculture. Hence, these are the densely populated areas of the world. Land Use Land is used for different Fig. 2.1: Salzburg in Austria purposes such as agriculture, Notice in how many ways  the land has been used in the forestry, mining, building above picture. houses, roads and setting up of industries. This is commonly termed as Land use. Can you list out the different ways in which Mamba’s and Peter’s family use their land? The use of land is determined by physical factors such as topography, soil, climate, minerals and availability of water. Human factors such as population and technology are also important determinants of land use pattern. Land can also be classified on the basis of ownership Let’s do as – private land and community land. Private land Talk to some is owned by individuals whereas, community land elderly person is owned by the community for common uses like in your family or neighbourhood and collection of fodder, fruits, nuts or medicinal herbs. collect information These community lands are also called common about changes property resources. in the land use People and their demands are ever growing but the over the years, in the place where availability of land is limited. The quality of land also you live. Display differs from place to place. People started encroaching your findings on a the common lands to build up commercial areas, bulletin board in housing complexes in the urban areas and to expand your classroom. the agricultural land in the rural areas. Today the vast changes in the land use pattern also reflect the cultural changes in our society. Land degradation, landslides, soil erosion, desertification are the major threats to the environment because of the expansion of agriculture and construction activities. 8 ResouRces and development 2024-25 Chapter-2.indd   8 8/17/2022   11:36:44 AM 1. 2. 3. 4. Fig. 2.2:  Change in land use over time Conservation of Land resoUrCe Growing population and their ever growing demand has led to a large scale destruction of forest cover and  arable land and has created a fear of losing this natural resource. Therefore, the present rate of degradation of land must Glossary be checked. Afforestation, land reclamation, regulated Weathering use of chemical pesticide and fertilisers and checks on The breaking up and decay of overgrazing are some of the common methods used to exposed rocks, conserve land resources. by temperature changes, frost s action, plants, oiL animals and The thin layer of grainy substance covering the surface human activity. of the earth is called soil. It is closely linked to land. Landforms determine the type of soil. Soil is made up of organic matter, minerals and weathered rocks found on the earth. This happens through the process of weathering. The right mix of minerals and organic matter make the soil fertile. Land, SoiL, Water, naturaL Vegetation and WiLdLife reSourceS  9 2024-25 Chapter-2.indd   9 8/17/2022   11:36:47 AM Landslides Landslides are simply defined as the mass movement of rock, debris or earth down a slope. They often take place in conjunction with earthquakes, floods and volcanoes. A prolonged spell of rainfall can cause heavy landslide that can block the flow of river for quite some time. The formation of river blocks can cause havoc to the settlements downstream on its bursting. In the hilly terrain landslides have been a major and widely spread natural disaster that often strike life and property and occupy a position of major A Landslide concern. A Case Study A massive landslide hit Pangi village near Reckong Peo in Kinnaur district of Himachal Pradesh and damaged a 200-meter stretch of old Hindustan-Tibet road, National Highway - 22. This landslide was triggered by intense blasting at Pangi village. Due to the blasting this weak zone of slope collapsed and caused intense damage to the road and nearby villages. The Pangi village was completely vacated to avoid any possible loss of life. Mitigation Mechanism Advancement in scientific techniques has empowered us to understand what factors cause landslides and how to manage them. Some broad mitigation techniques of landslide are as follows: •	 Hazard	 mapping	 to	 locate	 areas	 prone	 to landslides. Hence, such areas can be avoided for building settlements. •	 Construction of retention wall to stop land from slipping. •	 Increase	 in	 the	 vegetation	 cover	 to	 arrest landslide. •	 The	surface	drainage	control	works to control Retention Wall the movement of landslide along with rain water and spring flows. 10 ResouRces and development 2024-25 Chapter-2.indd   10 8/17/2022   11:36:49 AM Top soil with humus and vegetation Sub soil with sand, silt and Do you know? clay It takes hundreds of years to make Weathered rock material just one centimetre of soil. Parent rock Fig. 2.3: Soil Profile faCtors of soiL formation The major factors of soil formation are the nature of the parent rock and climatic factors. Other factors are the topography, role of organic material and time taken for the composition of soil formation. All these differ from place to place. Parent Rock Determines colour, Climate texture, chemical Temperature, properties Rainfall influence mineral, content, Soil rate of weathering permeability and humus formation Relief Altitude and Flora, Fauna and Micro-organism Time slope, determine Affect the rate of humus Determines thickness accumulation formation of soil profile of soil Fig. 2.4: Factors affecting soil formation Land, SoiL, Water, naturaL Vegetation and WiLdLife reSourceS  11 2024-25 Chapter-2.indd   11 8/17/2022   11:36:50 AM degradation of soiL and Conservation Activity measUres In India soils could be alluvial, Soil erosion and depletion are the major threats to soil black, red, laterite, as a resource. Both human and natural factors can desertic and lead to degradation of soils. Factors which lead to soil mountain soil. degradation are deforestation, overgrazing, overuse of Collect a handful chemical feritilisers or pesticides, rain wash, landslides of different types of soil and and floods. observe. How are Some methods of soil conservation are listed below: they different? Mulching: The bare ground between plants is covered with a layer of organic matter like straw. It helps to retain soil moisture. Contour barriers: Stones, grass, soil are used to build barriers along contours. Trenches are made in front of the barriers to collect water. Rock dam: Rocks are piled up to slow down the flow of water. This prevents gullies and further soil loss. Fig 2.5: Terrace Farming Fig 2.6: Contour Ploughing Terrace farming: Broad flat steps or terraces are made on the steep slopes so that flat surfaces are available to grow crops. They reduce surface runoff and soil erosion (Fig. 2.5). Intercropping: Different crops are grown in alternate rows and are sown at different times to protect the soil from rain wash. Contour ploughing: Ploughing parallel to the contours of a hill slope to form a natural barrier for water to flow down the slope (Fig. 2.6). Fig 2.7: Shelter Belts Shelter belts: In the coastal and dry regions, rows of trees are planted to check the wind movement to protect soil cover (Fig. 2.7). 12 ResouRces and development 2024-25 Chapter-2.indd   12 8/17/2022   11:36:51 AM Activity Take two trays A and B of same A B size. Make six holes at one end of these trays and then fill them with the same amount of soil. Leave the soil in tray A bare while sow wheat or rice grains in tray B. When the grain in tray B has grown a few centimetres high, place both the trays in such a way that they are on a slope. Pour one mug of water from the same height into each tray. Collect the muddy water that trickles down the holes of both trays in two separate containers and compare how much soil is washed out of each tray? Water Water is a vital renewable natural resource. Threefourth’s of the earth’s surface is covered with water. It is therefore appropriately called the ‘water planet’. It was in the primitive oceans that life began almost Do you know? 3.5 billion years back. Even today, the oceans cover In 1975, the two-thirds of the earth’s surface and support a rich consumption of variety of plant and animal life. The ocean water is water for human however saline and not fit for human consumption. use was 3850cu km/year. It soared Fresh water accounts for only about 2.7 per cent. Nearly to more than 6000 70 per cent of this occurs as ice sheets and glaciers in cu km/year in the Antarctica, Greenland and mountain regions. Due to year 2000. their location they are inaccessible. Only 1 per cent of freshwater is available and fit for human use. It is found as ground water, as surface water in rivers and lakes and as water vapour in the atmosphere. Fresh water is therefore, the most precious substance Do you know? on earth. Water can neither be added nor subtracted A dripping tap from the earth. Its total volume remains constant. wastes1200 Its abundance only seems to vary because it is in litres of water in constant motion, cycling through the oceans, the a year. air, the land and back again, through the processes of evaporation, precipitation and run-off. This as you already know is referred to as the ‘water cycle’. Land, SoiL, Water, naturaL Vegetation and WiLdLife reSourceS  13 2024-25 Chapter-2.indd   13 8/17/2022   11:36:53 AM Humans use huge amounts of water not only for drinking and washing but also in the process of production. Water for agriculture, industries, generating electricity through reservoirs of Activity dams are the other An average urban Indian uses about 150 litres usages. Increasing of water every day. population, rising Use Litres per person per day Drinking 3 demands for food and Cooking 4 cash crops, increasing Bathing 20 urbanisation and rising Flushing 40 standards of living Washing clothes 40 are the major factors Washing utensils 20 leading to shortages in Gardening 23 supply of fresh water Total 150 Can you suggest some ways to bring down this amount? either due to drying up of water sources or water pollution. Problems of Water availability There is scarcity of water in many regions of the world. Most of Africa, West Asia, South Asia, parts of western USA, north-west Mexico, parts of South America and entire Australia are facing shortages in fresh water supply. Countries located in climatic zones most susceptible to droughts face great problems of water scarcity. Thus, water shortage may be a consequence of variation in seasonal or annual precipitation or the scarcity is caused by over-exploitation and contamination of water sources. Conservation of Water resourCes Access to clean and adequate water sources is a major problem facing the world today. Steps have to be taken to conserve this dwindling resource. Even though water is a renewable resource, its overuse and pollution make it unfit for use. Discharge of untreated or partially treated sewage, agricultural chemicals Fig 2.8: River Yamuna is getting polluted due and industrial effluents in water bodies to sewage, industrial effluents and garbage are major contaminants. They pollute water with nitrates, metals and pesticides. 14 ResouRces and development 2024-25 Chapter-2.indd   14 27-02-2024   11:09:32 Most of these chemicals are non-biodegradable and reach human bodies through water. Water pollution can be controlled by treating these effluents suitably before releasing them in water bodies. Forest and other vegetation cover slow the surface runoff and replenish underground water. Water harvesting is another method to save surface runoff. The canals used for irrigating field should be properly lined to minimise losses by water seepage. Sprinklers effectively irrigate the area by checking water losses through seepage and evaporation. In dry regions with high rates of evaporation, drip or trickle irrigation is very useful. The valuable water resource Fig 2.9: A Water Sprinkler can therefore be conserved by adopting these means of irrigation. Do you know? Rain water natUraL vegetation and W harvesting is iLdLife the process of Some school children were visiting an exhibition on collecting rain handicrafts. The articles in the exhibition were collected water from roof from different parts of the country. Mona picked up a bag tops and directing and exclaimed, “This is a beautiful handbag!” “Yes, it it to an appropriate location where is made from Jute,” the teacher said. “Do you see those it is stored for baskets, lamp shades and chairs? Those are made of future use. On an canes and bamboos. In the eastern and north eastern average, one spell humid regions of India, bamboo grows in plenty.” Jassy of  rain for two was excited to see a silk scarf.  “See this beautiful hours is enough to scarf”. The teacher explained that silk is obtained from save 8,000 litres of silk worms that are bred on Mulberry trees. The children water. understood that plants provide us with many different products that we use in our day-to-day life. Natural vegetation and wildlife exist only in the narrow zone of contact between the lithosphere, hydrosphere and atmosphere that we call biosphere. In the biosphere living beings are inter-related and interdependent on each other for survival. This life supporting system is known as the ecosystem. Vegetation and wildlife are valuable resources. Plants provide us with timber, give shelter to animals, produce oxygen we breathe, protects soils so Fig 2.10: Silk Worms Land, SoiL, Water, naturaL Vegetation and WiLdLife reSourceS  15 2024-25 Chapter-2.indd   15 8/17/2022   11:36:55 AM essential for growing crops, act as shelter belts, help in storage of underground water, give us fruits, nuts, latex, turpentine oil, gum, Do you know? medicinal plants and also Vultures in the paper that is so essential the Indian subcontinent were for your studies. There are dying of kidney innumerable uses of plants failure shortly and you can add some more. after scavenging Wildlife includes animals, livestock treated birds, insects as well as the with diclofenac, a aquatic life forms. They provide painkiller that is us milk, meat, hides and wool. similar to aspirin Insects like bees provide us Fig 2.11: Brahma Kamal or ibuprofen. a Medicinal Herb Efforts are on to honey, help in pollination of ban the drug for flowers and have an important livestock use and role to play as decomposers breed vultures in in the ecosystem. The birds captivity. feed on insects and act as decomposers as well. Vulture due to its ability to feed on dead livestock is a scavenger and considered a vital cleanser of the environment. So animals big or small, all are integral Fig 2.12: A Blue Kingfisher to maintaining balance in the ecosystem. distribUtion of natUraL vegetation The growth of vegetation depends primarily on temperature and moisture. The major vegetation types of the world are grouped as forests, grasslands, scrubs and tundra. In areas of heavy rainfall, huge trees may thrive. The forests are thus associated with areas having abundant water supply. As the amount of moisture decreases the size of trees and their density reduces. Short stunted trees and grasses grow in the regions of moderate rainfall forming the grasslands of the world. Thorny shrubs and Fig. 2.13: Grassland and Forest 16 ResouRces and development 2024-25 Chapter-2.indd   16 8/17/2022   11:36:56 AM scrubs grow in dry areas of low rainfall. In such areas plants have deep roots and leaves with thorny and waxy surface reduce loss of moisture through transpiration. Tundra vegetation of cold Polar Regions comprise of mosses and lichens. Today there are many more people in the world than there were two centuries back. To feed the growing numbers, large areas of forests have been cleared Fig. 2.14: A Python in a forest to grow crops. Forest cover all over the world is vanishing rapidly. There is an urgent need to conserve this valuable resource. Conservation of natUraL vegetation and WiLdLife Forests are our wealth. Plants give shelter to the animals and together they maintain the ecosystem. Changes of climate and human interferences can cause the loss of natural habitats for the plants and animals. Many species have become vulnerable Fig. 2.15: A collage of a forest made by school students or endangered and some are on the verge of extinction. Deforestation, soil erosion, constructional activities, forest fires, tsunami and landslides are some of the human and natural factors which  accelerate the process of extinction of these resources. One of the major concerns is the poaching which result in a sharp decline in the number of particular species. The animals are poached for collection and illegal trade of hides, skins, nails, teeth, horns as well as feathers. Some of these animals are tiger, lion, elephant, deer, black buck, crocodile, rhinoceros, snow Fig. 2.16: Loss of rainforest in Great Nicobar after Tsunami Land, SoiL, Water, naturaL Vegetation and WiLdLife reSourceS  17 2024-25 Chapter-2.indd   17 8/17/2022   11:36:58 AM leopard, ostrich and peacock. These can be conserved by increasing awareness. National parks, wildlife sanctuaries, biosphere reserves are made to protect our natural vegetation and wildlife. Conservation of creeks, lakes, and wetlands is necessary to save the precious resource from depletion There is a balance in the environment if the relative number of species is not disturbed. Human activities in several parts of the world have disturbed the natural Fig. 2.17: Black buck also needs protection Forest Fire Activity Read the news item and find out how fire started in California ? Could it be avoided? Know More Forest fire is a threat to the entire region of fauna and flora. It occurs mainly due to three reasons : 1. Natural fire due to lightening etc. 2. Fire due to heat generated in the litter due to carelessness of people. 3. Fire purposely caused by local inhabitants, mischief makers, miscreants etc. Some Control Measures 1. Prevention of fires through education. 2. Prompt detection of fires through well co-ordinated network of observation points, efficient ground patroling and communication network. 18 ResouRces and development 2024-25 Chapter-2.indd   18 8/17/2022   11:36:59 AM habitats of many species. Due to indiscriminate killings, several birds and animals have either become extinct or Glossary are on the verge of extinction. National Park Awareness programmes like social forestry and A natural area Vanamohatasava should be encouraged at the regional designated to and community level. School children should be protect the encouraged to bird watch and visit nature camps so ecological integrity of one or more that they appreciate the habitat of varied species. ecosystems for the Many countries have passed laws against the trade present and  the as well as killing of birds and animals. In India, killing future generations lions, tigers, deers, great Indian bustards and peacocks is illegal. An international convention CITES has been established that lists several species of animals and birds in which trade is prohibited. Conservation of plants and animals is an ethical duty of every citizen. Fig. 2:18: A Herd of Cheetals Glossary Biosphere reserves Series of protected areas linked through a global network, intended to demonstrate Fig. 2:19: A herd of Elephants in Kaziranga the relationship National Park between conservation and development. Do you know? CITES (the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora) is an international agreement between governments. It aims to ensure that international trade in specimens of wild animals and plants does not threaten their survival. Roughly 5,000 species of animals and 28,000 species of plants are protected. Bears, dolphins, cacti, corals, orchids and aloes are some examples. Land, SoiL, Water, naturaL Vegetation and WiLdLife reSourceS  19 2024-25 Chapter-2.indd   19 8/17/2022   11:37:01 AM Exercises 1. Answer the following questions. (i)  Which are the two main climatic factors responsible for soil formation? (ii) Write any two reasons for land degradation today. (iii) Why is land considered an important resource? (iv) Name any two steps that government has taken to conserve plants and animals. (v) Suggest three ways to conserve water. 2. Tick the correct answer. (i) Which one of the following is NOT a factor of soil formation? (a) time (b) soil texture    (c) organic matter (ii) Which one of the following methods is most appropriate to check soil erosion on steep slopes? (a)  shelter belts (b) mulching (c) terrace cultivation (iii) Which one of the following is NOT in favour of the conservation of nature? (a)  switch off the bulb when not in use (b) close the tap immediately after using (c)  dispose polypacks after shopping 3. Match the followings : (i) Land use (a) prevent soil erosion (ii) Humus (b) narrow zone of contact between the lithosphere, hydrosphere and atmosphere ( iii) Rock dams (c) productive use of land (iv) Biosphere (d) organic matter deposited on top soil (e) contour ploughing 4. State whether the given statement is true or false. If true, write the reasons. (i) Ganga–Brahmaputra plain of India is an overpopulated region. (ii) Water availability per person in India is declining. (iii) Rows of trees planted in the coastal areas to check the wind movement is called intercropping. (iv) Human interference and changes of climate can maintain the ecosystem. 5. Activity Discuss some more reasons which are responsible for changes of land use pattern. Has your place undergone any change in the land use pattern in recent years? 20 ResouRces and development 2024-25 Chapter-2.indd   20 8/17/2022   11:37:03 AM Find out from your parents and elderly people. You can conduct an interview by asking the following questions. Place When your When your Why do you Are common grand parents were think this is areas and parent’s were in their 30’s happening? open spaces in their 30’s disappearing? Rural Number of cattle and poultry owned Number of trees and ponds in the village Main occupation of the head of the family Urban Number of cars owned Number of rooms in the house Number of metalled roads Number of flyovers in the city Number of parks and playgrounds Based on the table you have just completed, draw a picture of land use patterns that you foresee in your neighbourhood after 20 years. Why do you think that land use patterns change over the years? Land, SoiL, Water, naturaL Vegetation and WiLdLife reSourceS  21 2024-25 Chapter-2.indd   21 8/17/2022   11:37:04 AM