2 Inside Our Earth The earth, our homeland is a dynamic planet. It is constantly undergoing changes inside and outside. Have Do you know? you ever wondered what lies in the interior of the earth? What is the earth made up of? • The deepest mine in the world, is in INTERIOR OF THE EARTH South Africa. It is Crust Just like an onion, the Lithosphere about 4 km. deep. In earth is made up of search for oil Mantle engineers have dug a several concentric Core-mantle hole about 6 km. layers with one inside boundary deep. another (Fig. 2.1). The Inner core Outer • To reach to the uppermost layer over core centre of the earth the earth’s surface is (which is not called the crust. It is the possible!) you will thinnest of all the have to dig a hole layers. It is about 35 km. 6000 km. deep on on the continental the ocean floor. masses and only 5 km. Fig. 2.1: Interior of the Earth on the ocean floors. The main mineral constituents of the Continental continental mass are Oceanic Crust Continent Ocean Crust silica and alumina. It is thus called sial (si-silica and al-alumina). The oceanic crust mainly consists of silica and magnesium; it is therefore called sima (si-silica and ma-magnesium) (Fig. 2.2). Just beneath the crust is the mantle which extends up to a depth of 2900 km. below the crust. Fig. 2.2: Continental Crust and Oceanic Crust Reprint 2024-25 Do you know? The innermost layer is the core with a radius of about 3500 km. It is mainly made up of nickel and iron and is • The crust forms only called nife (ni – nickel and fe – ferrous i.e. iron). The 1 per cent of the central core has very high temperature and pressure. volume of the earth, 84 per cent consists ROCKS AND MINERALS of the mantle and 15 per cent makes The earth’s crust is made up of various types of rocks. the core. Any natural mass of mineral matter that makes up the • The radius of the earth’s crust is called a rock. Rocks can be of different earth is 6371 km. colour, size and texture. There are three major types of rocks: igneous rocks, sedimentary rocks and metamorphic rocks. When the molten magma cools, it becomes solid. Word Origin Rocks thus formed are called igneous rocks. They are also called primary rocks. There are two types of igneous Igneous: Latin word rocks: intrusive rocks and extrusive rocks. Ignis meaning fire. Can you imagine lava coming out from the volcanoes? Lava is actually fiery red molten magma coming out from Sedimentary: Latin word sedimentum the interior of the earth on its surface. When this molten meaning settle down. lava comes on the earth’s surface, it rapidly cools down and becomes solid. Rocks formed in such a way on the Metamorphic: Greek word metamorphose crust are called extrusive igneous rocks. They have a meaning change of form. very fine grained structure. For example, basalt. The Deccan plateau is made up of basalt rocks. Sometimes the molten magma cools down deep inside the earth’s crust. Solid rocks so formed are called intrusive igneous rocks. Since they cool down slowly they form large Glossary grains. Granite is an example of such a rock. Grinding Fossils: The remains stones used to prepare paste/powder of spices and grains of the dead plants and are made of granite. animals trapped in Rocks roll down, crack, and hit each other and are the layers of rocks are broken down into small fragments. These smaller particles called fossils. are called sediments. These sediments are transported and deposited by wind, water, etc. These loose sediments are compressed and hardened to form layers of rocks. These types of rocks are called sedimentary rocks. For example, sandstone is made from grains of sand. These rocks may also contain fossils of plants, animals and other microorganisms that once lived on them. Igneous and sedimentary rocks can change into metamorphic rocks under great heat and Fig. 2.3: Sedimentary rock turned pressure (Fig. 2.3). For example, clay changes into into a Metamorphic rock slate and limestone into marble. 8 OUR ENVIRONMENT Reprint 2024-25 Rocks are very useful to us. The hard rocks are used for making roads, houses and buildings. You use stones in many games. For example, seven stones (pitthoo), hopscotch (stapu/kit kit), five stones (gitti). Find out some more such games by asking your grand parents, parents, neighbours, etc. Let’s do Collect pictures of some monuments and find out which are the rocks used to build them. Two pictures have been collected for you. The Red Fort is made of red sandstone The Taj Mahal is made of white marble You will be surprised to know that one type of rock changes to another type under certain conditions in a cyclic manner. This process of transformation of the rock from one to another is known as the rock cycle. You have already learnt when the molten magma cools; it solidifies to become igneous rock. These igneous rocks are broken down into small particles that are transported and deposited to form sedimentary rocks. When the igneous and sedimentary rocks are subjected to heat and pressure they change into metamorphic rocks. The metamorphic rocks which are still under great heat and pressure melt down to form molten magma. This molten magma again can cool down and solidify into igneous rocks (Fig. 2.4). Fig. 2.4: Rock Cycle INSIDE OUR EARTH 9 Reprint 2024-25 Rocks are made up of different minerals. Minerals Let’s do are naturally occurring substances which have certain physical properties and definite chemical composition. What are the Minerals are very important to humankind. Some are minerals found in used as fuels. For example, coal, natural gas and your state? petroleum. They are also used in industries – iron, Collect some samples aluminium, gold, uranium, etc, in medicine, in to show in your class. fertilisers, etc. Exercises 1. Answer the following questions. (i) What are the three layers of the earth? (ii) What is a rock? (iii) Name three types of rocks. (iv) How are extrusive and intrusive rocks formed? (v) What do you mean by a rock cycle? (vi) What are the uses of rocks? (vii) What are metamorphic rocks? 2. Tick the correct answer. (i) The rock which is made up of molten magma is (a) Igneous (b) Sedimentary (c) Metamorphic (ii)  The innermost layer of the earth is (a) Crust (b) Core (c) Mantle (iii) Gold, petroleum and coal are examples of (a) Rocks (b) Minerals (c) Fossils (iv) Rocks which contain fossils are (a) Sedimentary rocks (b) Metamorphic rocks (c) Igneous rocks (v) The thinnest layer of the earth is (a) Crust (b) Mantle (c)  Core 3. Match the following. (i) Core (a) Earth’s surface (ii) Minerals (b) Used for roads and buildings (iii) Rocks (c) Made of silicon and alumina (iv) Clay (d) Has definite chemical composition (v) Sial (e) Innermost layer (f) Changes into slate (g) Process of transformation of the rock 10 OUR ENVIRONMENT Reprint 2024-25 4. Give reasons. (i) We cannot go to the centre of the earth. (ii) Sedimentary rocks are formed from sediments. (iii) Limestone is changed into marble. 5. For fun. (i) What are the minerals most commonly used in the following objects? (ii) Identify some more objects made up of different minerals. Karhai Ornaments Pan/Tava Hammer Bell Lamp INSIDE OUR EARTH 11 Reprint 2024-25