SECTION III EVERYDAY LIFE, CULTURE AND POLITICS 2024-25 2024-25 Print Culture and the Modern World It is difficult for us to imagine a world without printed matter. We find evidence of print everywhere around us – in books, journals, newspapers,  prints of famous paintings, and also in everyday things like theatre programmes, official circulars, calendars, diaries, advertisements, cinema posters at street corners. We read printed literature, see printed images, follow the news through newspapers, and track public debates that appear in print. We take for granted this world of print and often forget that there was a time before print. We may not realise that print itself  has a history which has, in fact, shaped our contemporary world. What is this history? When did printed literature begin to circulate? How has it helped create the modern world? In this chapter we will look at the development of print, from its beginnings in East Asia to its expansion in Europe and in India. We will understand the impact of  the spread of  technology and consider how social lives and cultures changed with the coming of print. Fig. 1 – Book making before the age of print, from Akhlaq-i-Nasiri, 1595. This is a royal workshop in the sixteenth century, much before printing began in India. You can see the text being dictated, written and illustrated. The art of writing and illustrating by hand was important in the age before print. Think about what happened to these forms of art with the coming of printing machines. 105 2024-25 P r i n t   PCr inut    Clutl tuure r e   a n d   t h e   M o d e r n   Wo r l d Chapter V 1  The First Printed Books The earliest kind of  print technology was developed in China, Japan and Korea. This was a system of  hand printing. From AD 594 onwards, books in China were printed by rubbing paper – also invented there – against the inked surface of  woodblocks. As both sides of the thin, porous sheet could not be printed, the traditional New words Chinese ‘accordion book’ was folded and stitched at the side. Calligraphy – The art of beautiful and stylised Superbly skilled craftsmen could duplicate, with remarkable accuracy, writing the beauty of  calligraphy. The imperial state in China was, for a very long time, the major producer of printed material. China possessed a huge bureaucratic system which recruited its personnel through civil service examinations. Textbooks for this examination were printed in vast numbers under the sponsorship of the imperial state.  From the sixteenth century, the number of  examination candidates went up and that increased the volume of print. By the seventeenth century, as urban culture bloomed in China, the uses of print diversified. Print was no longer used just by scholarofficials. Merchants used print in their everyday life, as they collected trade information. Reading increasingly became a leisure activity. The new readership preferred fictional narratives, poetry, autobiographies, anthologies of literary masterpieces, and romantic plays. Rich women began to read, and many women began publishing their poetry and plays. Wives of  scholar-officials published their works and courtesans wrote about their lives. This new reading culture was accompanied by a new technology. Western printing techniques and mechanical presses were imported in the late nineteenth century as Western powers established their outposts in China. Shanghai became the hub of the new print culture, catering to the Western-style schools. From hand printing there was now a gradual shift to mechanical printing. 1.1 Print in Japan Buddhist missionaries from China introduced hand-printing technology into Japan around AD 768-770. The oldest Japanese book, printed in AD 868, is the Buddhist Diamond Sutra, containing six sheets of  text and woodcut illustrations. Pictures were printed on textiles, Fig. 2 a – A page from the Diamond Sutra. 106 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World playing cards and paper money. In medieval Japan, poets and prose Belonging to the mid-13th century, printing woodblocks of writers were regularly published, the Tripitaka Koreana are a Korean and books were cheap and abundant. collection of Buddhist scriptures. They were engraved on about Printing of visual material led to 80,000 woodblocks. They were interesting publishing practices. In inscribed on the UNESCO Memory of the World Register in 2007. the late eighteenth century, in the Source: http://www.cha.go.kr flourishing urban circles at Edo (later to be known as Tokyo), Fig. 2b – Tripitaka Koreana illustrated collections of paintings depicted an elegant urban culture, involving artists, courtesans, and teahouse gatherings. Libraries and bookstores were packed with hand-printed material of various types – books on women, musical instruments, calculations, tea ceremony, flower arrangements, proper etiquette, cooking and famous places. Box 1 Kitagawa Utamaro, born in Edo in 1753, was widely known for his contributions to an art form called ukiyo (‘pictures of the floating world’) or depiction of ordinary human experiences, especially urban ones. These prints travelled to contemporary US and Europe and influenced artists like Manet, Monet and Van Gogh. Publishers like Tsutaya Juzaburo identified subjects and commissioned artists who drew the theme in outline. Then a skilled woodblock carver pasted the drawing on a woodblock and carved a printing block to reproduce the painter’s lines. In the process, the original drawing Fig. 3 – An ukiyo would be destroyed and only prints would survive. print by Kitagawa Utamaro. Fig. 4a – A morning scene, ukiyo print by Shunman Kubo, late eighteenth century. A man looks out of the window at the snowfall while women prepare tea and perform other domestic duties. 107 2024-25 Print   Culture 2  Print Comes to Europe For centuries, silk and spices from China flowed into Europe through New words the silk route. In the eleventh century, Chinese paper reached Europe Vellum – A parchment  made from the skin via the same route. Paper made possible the production of of animals manuscripts, carefully written by scribes. Then, in 1295, Marco Polo, a great explorer, returned to Italy after many years of exploration in China. As you read above, China already had the technology of woodblock printing. Marco Polo brought this knowledge back with him. Now Italians began producing books with woodblocks, and soon the technology spread to other parts of  Europe. Luxury editions were still handwritten on very expensive vellum, meant for aristocratic circles and rich monastic libraries which scoffed at printed books as cheap vulgarities. Merchants and students in the university towns bought the cheaper printed copies. As the demand for books increased, booksellers all over Europe began exporting books to many different countries. Book fairs were held at different places. Production of  handwritten manuscripts was Fig. 4b – Jikji also organised in new ways to meet the expanded demand. Scribes or skilled handwriters were no longer solely employed by wealthy The Jikji of Korea is among the world’s oldest existing books printed with movable metal type. or influential patrons but increasingly by booksellers as well. More It contains the essential features of Zen than 50 scribes often worked for one bookseller. Buddhism. About 150 monks of India, China and Korea are mentioned in the book. It was printed But the production of handwritten manuscripts could not satisfy in late 14th century. While the first volume of the book is unavailable, the second one is available the ever-increasing demand for books. Copying was an expensive, in the National Library of France. This work marked laborious and time-consuming business. Manuscripts were fragile, an important technical change in the print culture. That is why it was inscribed on the awkward to handle, and could not be carried around or read easily. UNESCO Memory of the World Register in 2001. Their circulation therefore remained limited.  With the growing demand for books, woodblock printing gradually became more and more popular. By the early fifteenth century, woodblocks were being widely used in Europe to print textiles, playing cards, and religious pictures with simple, brief  texts. There was clearly a great need for even quicker and cheaper Activity reproduction of  texts. This could only be with the invention of  a new print technology. The breakthrough occurred at Strasbourg, Imagine that you are Marco Polo. Write a letter from China to describe the world of print which Germany, where Johann Gutenberg developed the first-known you have seen there. printing press in the 1430s. 108 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World 2.1 Gutenberg and the Printing Press Gutenberg was the son of a merchant and grew up on a large agricultural estate. From his childhood he had seen wine and olive presses. Subsequently, he learnt the art of  polishing stones, became a master goldsmith, and also acquired the expertise to create lead moulds used for making trinkets. Drawing on this knowledge, Gutenberg adapted existing technology to design his innovation. The olive press provided the model for the printing press, and moulds were used for casting the metal types for the letters of the alphabet. By 1448, Gutenberg perfected the system. The first book he printed was the Bible. About 180 copies were printed and it took three Fig. 5 – A Portrait  of Johann Gutenberg, years to produce them. By the standards of the time this was fast 1584. production. The new technology did not entirely displace the existing art of producing books by hand. Frame In fact, printed books at first closely resembled the written manuscripts in appearance and layout. The metal letters imitated the ornamental handwritten styles. Borders were illuminated by hand Screw with foliage and other patterns, and illustrations were painted. In the books printed for the rich, space for decoration was kept blank on Handle the printed page. Each purchaser could choose the design and decide on the painting school that would do the illustrations. Platen In the hundred years between 1450 and 1550, printing presses were set up in most countries of  Europe.  Printers from Germany travelled to other countries, seeking work and helping start new presses. As Printing block placed over the number of  printing presses grew, book production boomed. paper The second half of the fifteenth century saw 20 million copies of printed books flooding the markets in Europe. The number went Fig. 6  – Gutenberg Printing Press. Notice the long handle attached to the screw. up in the sixteenth century to about 200 million copies. This handle was used to turn the screw and press down the platen over the printing block This shift from hand printing to mechanical printing led to the that was placed on top of a sheet of damp print revolution. paper. Gutenberg developed metal types for each of the 26 characters of the Roman alphabet and devised a way of moving them around so as to compose different words of the New words text. This came to be known as the moveable type printing machine, and it remained the basic Platen – In letterpress printing, platen is a board which is print technology over the next 300 years. Books could now be produced much faster than pressed onto the back of the paper to get the impression from was possible when each print block was the type. At one time it used to be a wooden board; later it prepared by carving a piece of wood by hand. The Gutenberg  press could print 250 sheets was made of  steel on one side per hour. 109 2024-25 Print   Culture Fig. 7 – Pages of Gutenberg’s Bible, the first printed book in Europe. Gutenberg printed about 180 copies, of which no more than 50 have survived. Look at these pages of Gutenberg’s Bible carefully. They were not just products of new technology. The text was printed in the new Gutenberg press with metal type, but the borders were carefully designed, painted and illuminated by hand by artists. No two copies were the same. Every page of each copy was different. Even when two copies look similar, a careful comparison will reveal differences. Elites everywhere preferred this lack of uniformity: what they possessed then could be claimed as unique, for no one else owned a copy that was exactly the same. In the text you will notice the use of colour within the letters in various places. This had two functions: it added colour to the page, and highlighted all the holy words to emphasise their significance. But the colour on every page of the text was added by hand. Gutenberg printed the text in black, leaving spaces where the colour could be filled in later. Fig. 8 –  A printer’s workshop, sixteenth century. This picture depicts what a printer’s shop looked like in the sixteenth century. All the activities are going on under one roof. New words In the foreground on the right, compositors are at work, while Compositor – The person who composes the on the left galleys are being prepared and ink is being applied on the metal types; in the background, the printers are turning the text for printing screws of the press, and near them proofreaders are at work. Galley – Metal frame in which types are laid Right in front is the final product – the double-page printed sheets, stacked in neat piles, waiting to be bound. and the text composed 110 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World 3  The Print Revolution and Its Impact What was the print revolution? It was not just a development, a new way of  producing books; it  transformed the lives of  people, changing their relationship to information and knowledge, and with institutions and authorities. It influenced popular perceptions and opened up new ways of  looking at things. Let us explore some of  these changes. 3.1 A New Reading Public With the printing press, a new reading public emerged. Printing reduced the cost of  books. The time and labour required to produce Activity each book came down, and multiple copies could be produced You are a bookseller advertising the availability with greater ease. Books flooded the market, reaching out to an of new cheap printed books. Design a poster ever-growing readership. for your shop window. Access to books created a new culture of  reading. Earlier, reading was restricted to the elites. Common people lived in a world of  oral culture. They heard sacred texts read out, ballads recited, and folk tales narrated. Knowledge was transferred orally. People collectively heard a story, or saw a performance. As you will see in Chapter 8, they did not read a book individually and silently. Before the age of print, books were not only expensive but they could not be produced in sufficient numbers. Now books could reach out to wider sections of people. If earlier there was a hearing public, now a reading public came into being. But the transition was not so simple. Books could be read only by the literate, and the rates of literacy in most European countries were very low till the twentieth century. How, then, could publishers persuade the common people to welcome the printed book? To do this, they had to keep in mind the wider reach of the printed work: even those who did not read could certainly enjoy listening to books being read out. So printers began publishing popular ballads and folk tales, and such books would be profusely illustrated with pictures. These were then sung and recited at gatherings in villages and in New words taverns in towns. Ballad – A historical account or folk tale in Oral culture thus entered print and printed material was orally verse, usually sung or recited transmitted. The line that separated the oral and reading cultures Taverns – Places where people gathered to became blurred. And the hearing public and reading public became drink alcohol, to be served food, and to meet intermingled. friends and exchange news 111 2024-25 Print   Culture 3.2 Religious Debates and the Fear of Print Print created the possibility of wide circulation of ideas, and introduced a new world of debate and discussion. Even those who disagreed with established authorities could now print and circulate their ideas. Through the printed message, they could persuade people to think differently, and move them to action. This had significance in different spheres of life. Not everyone welcomed the printed book, and those who did also had fears about it. Many were apprehensive of the effects that the easier access to the printed word and the wider circulation of books, could have on people’s minds. It was feared that if there was no control over what was printed and read then rebellious and irreligious thoughts might spread. If that happened the authority of ‘valuable’ literature would be destroyed. Expressed by religious authorities and monarchs, as well as many writers and artists, this anxiety was the basis of widespread criticism of the new printed literature that had begun Fig. 9 – J.V. Schley, L’Imprimerie, 1739. to circulate. This is one of the many images produced in early modern Europe, celebrating the coming of print. You can see the Let us consider the implication of this in one sphere printing press descending from heaven, carried by a goddess. On two sides of the goddess, blessing the machine, are of  life in early modern Europe – namely,  religion. Minerva (the goddess of wisdom) and Mercury (the messenger god, also symbolising reason). The women in the foreground In 1517, the religious reformer Martin Luther wrote are holding plaques with the portraits of six pioneer printers of different countries. In the middle ground on the left (figure Ninety Five Theses criticising many of the practices encircled) is the portrait of Gutenberg. and rituals of the Roman Catholic Church.  A printed copy of  this was posted on a church door in Wittenberg. It challenged the Church to debate his ideas.  Luther’s writings were immediately reproduced in vast numbers and read widely. This lead to a division New words within the Church and to the beginning of the Protestant Reformation. Luther’s translation of  the New Testament sold 5,000 Protestant Reformation – A sixteenth-century copies within a few weeks and a second edition appeared within movement to reform the Catholic Church three months. Deeply grateful to print, Luther said, ‘Printing is the dominated by Rome. Martin Luther was one ultimate gift of  God and the greatest one.’ Several scholars, in fact, of  the main Protestant reformers. Several think that print brought about a new intellectual atmosphere and traditions of anti-Catholic Christianity helped spread the new ideas that led to the Reformation. developed out of the movement 112 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World 3.3 Print and Dissent New words Print and popular religious literature stimulated many distinctive Inquisition – A former Roman Catholic court individual interpretations of faith even among little-educated working for identifying and punishing heretics people. In the sixteenth century, Menocchio, a miller in Italy, began Heretical – Beliefs which do not follow the to read books that were available in his locality. He reinterpreted the accepted teachings of the Church. In medieval message of the Bible and formulated a view of God and Creation times, heresy was seen as a threat to the right that enraged the Roman Catholic Church. When the Roman Church of the Church to decide on what should be began its inquisition to repress heretical ideas, Menocchio was hauled believed and what should not. Heretical beliefs up twice and ultimately executed. The Roman Church, troubled by were severely punished such effects of popular readings and questionings of faith, imposed Satiety – The state of being fulfilled much severe controls over publishers and booksellers and began to maintain beyond the point of satisfaction an Index of Prohibited Books from 1558. Seditious – Action, speech or writing that is seen as opposing  the government Source A Fear of the book Erasmus, a Latin scholar and a Catholic reformer, who criticised the excesses of Catholicism but kept his distance from Luther, expressed a deep anxiety about printing. He wrote in Adages (1508): ‘To what corner of the world do they not fly, these swarms of new books? It may be that one here and there contributes something worth knowing, but the very multitude of them is hurtful to scholarship, because it creates a glut, and even in good things satiety is most harmful ... [printers] fill the world with books, not just trifling things Fig. 10 – The macabre dance. (such as I write, perhaps), but stupid, ignorant, This sixteenth-century print shows how the fear of printing was slanderous, scandalous, raving, irreligious and dramatised in visual representations of the time. In this highly seditious books, and the number of them interesting woodcut the coming of print is associated with the end is such that even the valuable publications lose of the world. The interior of the printer’s workshop here is the site their value.’ of a dance of death. Skeletal figures control the printer and his workers, define and dictate what is to be done and what is to be Source produced. Discuss Write briefly why some people feared that the development of print could lead to the growth of dissenting ideas. 113 2024-25 Print   Culture 4  The Reading Mania Through the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries literacy rates went New words up in most parts of Europe. Churches of different denominations set up schools in villages, carrying literacy to peasants and artisans. Denominations – Sub groups within a religion By the end of  the eighteenth century, in some parts of  Europe Almanac – An annual publication giving literacy rates were as high as 60 to 80 per cent. As literacy and schools astronomical data, information about the movements of the sun and moon, timing of spread in European countries, there was a virtual reading mania. full tides and eclipses, and much else that was People wanted books to read and printers produced books in everof importance in the everyday life of people increasing numbers. Chapbook – A term used to describe pocketNew forms of  popular literature appeared in print, targeting new size books that are sold by travelling pedlars audiences. Booksellers employed pedlars who roamed around called chapmen. These became popular from villages, carrying little books for sale. There were almanacs or ritual the time of the sixteenth-century print revolution calendars, along with ballads and folktales. But other forms of  reading matter, largely for entertainment, began to reach ordinary readers as well. In England, penny chapbooks were carried by petty pedlars known as chapmen, and sold for a penny, so that even the poor could buy them. In France, were the “Biliotheque Bleue”, which were low-priced small books printed on poor quality paper, and bound in cheap blue covers. Then there were the romances, printed on four to six pages, and the more substantial ‘histories’ which were stories about the past. Books were of  various sizes, serving many different purposes and interests. The periodical press developed from the early eighteenth century, Box 2 combining information about current affairs with entertainment. Newspapers and journals carried information about wars and trade, In 1791, a London publisher, James Lackington, wrote in his diary: as well as news of  developments in other places. ‘The sale of books in general has increased Similarly, the ideas of  scientists and philosophers now became more prodigiously within the last twenty years. The poorer sort of farmers and even the poor country accessible to the common people. Ancient and medieval scientific people in general who before that period spent texts were compiled and published, and maps and scientific diagrams their winter evenings in relating stories of witches, ghosts, hobgoblins … now shorten the winter were widely printed. When scientists like Isaac Newton began to night by hearing their sons and daughters read publish their discoveries, they could influence a much wider circle them tales, romances, etc. If John goes to town with a load of hay, he is charged to be sure not of  scientifically minded readers. The writings of  thinkers such as to forget to bring home Peregrine Pickle’s Thomas Paine, Voltaire and Jean Jacques Rousseau were also widely Adventure … and when Dolly is sent to sell her printed and read. Thus their ideas about science, reason and rationality eggs, she is commissioned to purchase The History of Joseph Andrews.’ found their way into popular literature. 114 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World 4.1 ‘Tremble, therefore, tyrants of the world!’ By the mid-eighteenth century, there was a common conviction that Source B books were a means of spreading progress and enlightenment. Many believed that books could change the world,  liberate society from This is how Mercier describes the impact of the despotism and tyranny, and herald a time when reason and intellect printed word, and the power of reading in one of his books: would rule. Louise-Sebastien Mercier, a novelist in eighteenth-century ‘Anyone who had seen me reading would have France, declared: ‘The printing press is the most powerful engine of compared me to a man dying of thirst who was progress and public opinion is the force that will sweep despotism gulping down some fresh, pure water … Lighting my lamp with extraordinary caution, I threw away.’ In many of  Mercier’s novels, the heroes are transformed by myself hungrily into the reading. An easy acts of  reading. They devour books, are lost in the world books eloquence, effortless and animated, carried me create, and become enlightened in the process.  Convinced of  the from one page to the next without my noticing it. A clock struck off the hours in the silence of power of print in bringing enlightenment and destroying the basis the shadows, and I heard nothing. My lamp began of  despotism, Mercier proclaimed: ‘Tremble, therefore, tyrants of to run out of oil and produced only a pale light, the world! Tremble before the virtual writer!’ but still I read on. I could not even take out time to raise the wick for fear of interrupting my pleasure. How those new ideas rushed into my brain! How my intelligence adopted them!’ 4.2 Print Culture and the French Revolution Many historians have argued that print culture created the conditions Quoted by Robert Darnton, The Forbidden Bestwithin which French Revolution occurred. Can we make such Sellers of Pre-Revolutionary France, 1995. a connection? Source Three types of arguments have been usually put forward. First: print popularised the ideas of  the Enlightenment thinkers. New words Collectively, their writings provided a critical commentary on tradition, superstition and despotism. They argued for the rule of reason rather Despotism – A system of governance in which than custom, and demanded that everything be judged through the absolute power is exercised by an individual, application of  reason and rationality. They attacked the sacred unregulated by legal and constitutional checks authority of the Church and the despotic power of the state, thus eroding the legitimacy of a social order based on tradition. The writings of  Voltaire and Rousseau were read widely; and those who read these books saw the world through new eyes, eyes that were questioning, critical and rational. Second: print created a new culture of dialogue and debate. All values, norms and institutions were re-evaluated and discussed by a public that had become aware of the power of reason, and recognised the need to question existing ideas and beliefs. Within this public culture, new ideas of  social revolution came into being. Third: by the 1780s there was an outpouring of literature that mocked the royalty and criticised their morality. In the process, it raised 115 2024-25 Print   Culture questions about the existing social order. Cartoons and caricatures typically suggested that the monarchy remained absorbed only in sensual pleasures while the common people suffered  immense hardships. This literature circulated underground and led to the growth of  hostile sentiments against the monarchy. How do we look at these arguments?  There can be no doubt that print helps the spread of  ideas. But we must remember that people did not read just one kind of literature. If they read the ideas of Voltaire and Rousseau, they were also exposed to monarchical and Activity Church propaganda. They were not influenced directly by everything Imagine that you are a cartoonist in France they read or saw. They accepted some ideas and rejected others. before the revolution. Design a cartoon as it They interpreted things their own way. Print did not directly shape would have appeared in a pamphlet. their minds, but it did open up the possibility of  thinking differently. Fig. 11 – The nobility and the common people before the French Revolution, a cartoon of the late eighteenth century. The cartoon shows how the ordinary people – peasants, artisans and workers – had a hard time while the nobility enjoyed life and oppressed them. Circulation of cartoons like this one had an impact on the thinking of people before the revolution. Discuss Why do some historians think that print culture created the basis for the French Revolution? 116 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World 5  The Nineteenth Century The nineteenth century saw vast leaps in mass literacy in Europe, bringing in large numbers of new readers among children, women and workers. 5.1 Children, Women and Workers As primary education became compulsory from the late nineteenth century, children became an important category of  readers. Production of  school textbooks became critical for the publishing industry. A children’s press, devoted to literature for children alone, was set up in France in 1857. This press published new works as well as old fairy tales and folk tales. The Grimm Brothers in Germany spent years compiling traditional folk tales gathered from peasants. What they collected was edited before the stories were published in a collection in 1812.  Anything  that was considered unsuitable for children or would appear vulgar to the elites, was not included in the  published version.  Rural folk tales thus acquired a new form. In this way, print recorded old tales but also changed them. Women became important as readers as well as writers. Penny magazines (see Fig. 12) were especially meant for women, as Fig. 12 – Frontispiece of Penny Magazine. were manuals teaching proper behaviour and housekeeping. Penny Magazine was published between 1832 and 1835 When novels began to be written in the nineteenth century, in England by the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge. It was aimed primarily at the working class. women were seen as important readers. Some of  the bestknown novelists were women: Jane Austen, the Bronte sisters, George Eliot. Their writings became important in defining a new type of  woman:  a person with will, strength of  personality, determination and the power to think. Box 3 Lending libraries had been in existence from the seventeenth century onwards. In the nineteenth century, lending libraries in England Thomas Wood, a Yorkshire mechanic, narrated how he would rent old newspapers and read became instruments for educating white-collar workers, artisans them by firelight in the evenings as he could not and lower-middle-class people. Sometimes, self-educated working afford candles. Autobiographies of poor people class people wrote for themselves. After the working day was narrated their struggles to read against grim obstacles: the twentieth-century Russian gradually shortened from the mid-nineteenth century, workers had revolutionary author Maxim Gorky’s My Childhood some time for self-improvement and self-expression. They wrote and My University provide glimpses of such struggles. political tracts and autobiographies in large numbers. 117 2024-25 Print   Culture 5.2 Further Innovations By the late eighteenth century, the press came to be made out of metal. Through the nineteenth century, there were a series of  further innovations in printing technology. By the mid-nineteenth century, Richard M. Hoe of  New York had perfected the power-driven cylindrical press. This was capable of  printing 8,000 sheets per hour. This press was particularly useful for printing newspapers.  In the late nineteenth century, the offset press was developed which could print up to six colours at a time. From the turn of the twentieth century, electrically operated presses accelerated printing operations. A series of other developments followed. Methods of feeding paper improved, the quality of plates became better, automatic paper reels and photoelectric controls of the colour register were introduced. The accumulation of several individual mechanical improvements transformed the appearance of printed texts. Printers and publishers continuously developed new strategies to sell their product. Nineteenth-century periodicals serialised important novels, which gave birth to a particular way of writing novels.  In the 1920s in England, popular works were sold in Activity cheap series, called the Shilling Series. The dust cover or the book jacket is also a twentieth-century innovation. With the Look at Fig. 13. What impact do such onset of the Great Depression in the 1930s, publishers feared a advertisements have on the public mind? Do you think everyone reacts to printed material decline in book purchases. To sustain buying, they brought in the same way? out cheap paperback editions. Fig. 13 – Advertisements at a railway station in England, a lithograph by Alfred Concanen, 1874. Printed advertisements and notices were plastered on street walls, railway platforms and public buildings. 118 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World