4 Growing up as Boys and Girls Being a boy or a girl is an important part of one’s identity. The society we grow up in teaches us what kind of behaviour is acceptable for girls and boys, what boys and girls can or cannot do. We often grow up thinking that these things are exactly the same everywhere. But do all societies look at boys and girls in the same way? We will try and answer this question in this chapter. We will also look at how the different roles assigned to boys and girls prepare them for their future roles as men and women. We will learn that most societies value men and women differently. The roles women play and the work they do are usually valued less than the roles men play and the work they do. This chapter will also examine how inequalities between men and women emerge in the area of work. CHAPTER Growing up in Samoa in the 1920s The Samoan Islands are part of a large group of small islands in the southern part of the Pacific Ocean. In the 1920s, according to research reports on Samoan society, children did not go to school. They learnt many things, such as how to take care of children or do household work from older children and from adults. Fishing was a very important activity on the islands. Young people, therefore, learnt to undertake long fishing expeditions. But they learnt these things at different points in their childhood. As soon as babies could walk, their mothers or other adults no longer looked after them. Older children, often as young as five years old, took over this responsibility. Both boys and girls looked after A Class VII Samoan child their younger siblings. But, by the time a boy was in his school uniform. about nine years old, he joined the older boys in learning outdoor jobs like fishing and planting In what ways do the experiences coconuts. Girls had to continue looking after small of Samoan children and teenagers children or do errands for adults till they were differ from your own experiences teenagers. But, once they became teenagers they had of growing up? Is there anything much more freedom. After the age of fourteen or so, in this experience that you wish girls also went on fishing trips, worked in the was part of your growing up? plantations, learnt how to weave baskets. Cooking was done in special cooking-houses, where boys were supposed to do most of the work while girls helped with the preparations. Growing up male in Madhya Pradesh in the 1960s The following is adapted from an account of experiences of being in a small town in Madhya Pradesh in the 1960s. From Class VI onwards, boys and girls went to separate schools. The girls’ school was designed very differently from the boys’ school. They had a central Why do girls like to go to school courtyard where they played in total seclusion and together in groups? Chapter 4: Growing up as Boys and Girls 39 Make a drawing of a street or a safety from the outside world. The boys’ school had park in your neighbourhood. Show no such courtyard and our playground was just a the different kinds of activities big space attached to the school. Every evening, once young boys and girls may be school was over, the boys watched as hundreds of engaged in. You could do this school girls crowded the narrow streets. As these individually or in groups. girls walked on the streets, they looked so purposeful. This was unlike the boys who used the streets as a Are there as many girls as boys in place to stand around idling, to play, to try out tricks your drawing? Most probably you with their bicycles. For the girls, the street was simply would have drawn fewer girls. Can a place to get straight home. The girls always went you think of reasons why there in groups, perhaps because they also carried fears are fewer women and girls in your of being teased or attacked. neighbourhood streets, parks and markets in the late evenings or at After reading the two examples above, we realise night? that there are many different ways of growing up. Often we think that there is only one way in which Are girls and boys doing different children grow up. This is because we are most activities? Can you think of familiar with our own experiences. If we talk to elders reasons why this might be so? in our family, we will see that their childhoods were What would happen if you probably very different from ours. replaced the girls with the boys and vice-versa? We also realise that societies make clear distinctions between boys and girls. This begins from a very young age. We are for example, given different toys to play with. Boys are usually given cars to play with and girls dolls. Both toys can be a lot of fun to play with. Why are girls then given dolls and boys cars? Toys become a way of telling children that they will have different futures when they become men and women. If we think about it, this difference is created in the smallest and most everyday things. How girls must dress, what games boys should play, how girls need to talk softly or boys need to be tough. All these are ways of telling children that they have specific roles to play when they grow up to be men and women. Later in life this affects the subjects we can study or the careers we can choose. In most societies, including our own, the roles men and women play or the work they do, are not valued equally. Men and women do not have the same status. Let us look at how this difference exists in the work done by men and women. 40 Social and Political Life ‘MY MOTHER Harmeet’s mother Shonali, how can Yes, but that’s not real DOES NOT WORK’ always comes for you say that! You work, it’s just house work! excursions, beause know that Jaspreet Ma, we are going on a she doesn’t work. aunty is up at 5 a.m. school excursion. Rosie Ma’am everyday doing all Oh! That’s what you needs volunteers. Can’t you the housework! think, do you? Let’s go over take a holiday from office to their house and ask and volunteer? Jaspreet what she thinks! At the Singh’s house Then Jaspreet, why don’t What fun! We’ll take care Harsharan, Shonali But isn’t that correct aunty? you just relax and let them of everything tomorrow thinks that your wife My mother is a housewife – manage everything for a – with Papa! is not a working she does not work! change? person! Great idea! OK, I’ll go on strike tomorrow! Ha, ha! Next morning, 7:30 a.m. Oh-ho! That’s Hurry, hurry! And the school bus! I’ll ask Harmeet to switch Oh God! Look at the time! have to drop on the pump! Where’s my breakfast? Why aren’t them in the car. the children ready? HONK HONK How would I know? I’m on strike, remember? Besides, Mangala has also taken leave today. 41 Evening, 6.00 p.m. But, what about the kids’ lunch boxes? I’ll give you some money. Just buy something from the Oh no! Forgot canteen today... DING about that! Ma already gave us DING money for that! I’m exhausted! How about some tea? Oh, I forgot...your strike...I’ll make some myself. The house looks like it Harmeet, where Did you expect it to remain in exactly the was hit by a hurricane! on earth are the same condition in which you left it this tea leaves? morning, dear? Hee hee... I wonder if they still believe I don’t work?...and now I have to remind them that Chachaji and Chachiji are coming for dinner. Valuing housework Harmeet’s family did not think that the work Jaspreet did within the house was real work. This feeling is not unique to their families. Across the world, the main responsibility for housework and care-giving tasks, like looking after the family, especially children, the elderly and sick members, lies with women. Yet, as we have seen, the work that women do within the home is not recognised as work. It is also assumed that this is something that comes naturally to women. It, therefore, does not have to be paid for. And society devalues this work. 42 Social and Political Life Lives of domestic workers In the story above, Harmeet’s mother was not the only one who did the housework. A lot of the work was done by Mangala, their domestic helper. Many homes, particularly in towns and cities, employ domestic workers. They do a lot of work – sweeping and cleaning, washing clothes and dishes, cooking, looking after young children or the elderly. Most domestic workers are women. Sometimes, even young boys or girls are employed to do this work. Wages are low, as domestic work Melani with her daughter. does not have much value. A domestic worker’s day can begin as early as five in the morning and end as late as twelve at night! Despite the hard work they do, their employers often do not show them much respect. This is what Melani, a domestic worker had to say about her experience of working in Delhi – “My first job was with a rich family that lived in a three-storeyed house. The memsahib was very strange as she would shout Were Harmeet and Shonali correct to get any work done. My work was in the kitchen. in saying that Harmeet’s mother There were two other girls who did the cleaning. did not work? Our day would begin at 5 o’clock. For breakfast we would get a cup of tea and two dry rotis. We What do you think would happen could never get a third roti. In the evening, when if your mother or those involved I cooked the food, the two other girls would beg in doing the work at home went me to give them an extra roti. I would secretly on a strike for a day? give it to them and make an extra one for myself. We were so hungry after working through the day! Why do you think that men and We could not wear chappals in the house. In the boys generally do not do winter, our feet would swell up with the cold. I housework? Do you think they used to feel scared of the memsahib but also felt should? angry and humiliated. Did we not work all day? Did we not deserve to be treated with some respect?” In fact, what we commonly term as housework actually involves many different tasks. A number of these tasks require heavy physical work. In both rural and urban areas women and girls have to fetch water. In rural areas women and girls carry heavy headloads of firewood. Tasks like Chapter 4: Growing up as Boys and Girls 43 washing clothes, cleaning, sweeping and picking up loads require bending, lifting and carrying. Many chores, like cooking, involve standing for long hours in front of hot stoves. The work women do is strenuous and physically demanding — words that we normally associate with men. Another aspect of housework and care-giving that we do not recognise is that it is very time consuming. In fact, if we add up the housework and the work, women do outside the home, we find that women spend much more time working than men and have much less time for leisure. Below is some data from a special study done by the Central Statistical Organization of India (1998–1999). See if you can fill in the blanks. State Women Paid Women Unpaid Women Men Paid Men Unpaid Men (Work hours (Housework (Total) (Work hours (Housework (Total) per week) hours per week) per week) hours per week) Haryana 23 30 ? 38 2 ? Tamil Nadu 19 35 ? 40 4 ? What are the total number of work Women’s work and equality hours spent by women in Haryana and Tamil Nadu each week? As we have seen the low value attached to women’s household and care-giving work is not an individual How does this compare with the or family matter. It is part of a larger system of total number of work hours spent inequality between men and women. It, therefore, by men? has to be dealt with through actions not just at the level of the individual or the family but also by the government. As we now know, equality is an important principle of our Constitution. The Constitution says that being male or female should Many women like Shonali’s mother in not become a reason for discrimination. In reality, the story and the women in Tamil Nadu inequality between the sexes exists. The government and Haryana who were surveyed work is, therefore, committed to understanding the reasons both inside and outside the home. This is for this and taking positive steps to remedy the often referred to as the double burden of situation. For example, it recognises that burden of women’s work. child-care and housework falls on women and girls. 44 Social and Political Life This naturally has an impact on whether Children at an Anganwadi centre in a girls can attend school. It determines village in Madhya Pradesh. whether women can work outside the house and what kind of jobs and careers they can have. The government has set up anganwadis or child-care centres in several villages in the country. The government has passed laws that make it mandatory for organisations that have more than 30 women employees to provide crèche facilities. The provision of crèches helps many women to take up employment outside the home. It also makes it possible for more girls to attend schools. Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) www.in.undp.org Chapter 4: Growing up as Boys and Girls 45 What do you think this poster is trying to say? This poster was created by a women’s group in Bengal. Can you write an interesting slogan for the poster? 46 Social and Political Life EXERCISES 1. Are the statements given alongside true or false? Support a. All societies do not think your answer with the use of an example – similarly about the roles that boys and girls play. 2. Housework is invisible and unpaid work. b. Our society does not make Housework is physically demanding. distinctions between boys and Housework is time consuming. girls when they are growing up. Write in your own words what is meant by the terms c. Women who stay at home do ‘invisible’, ‘physically demanding’, and ‘time consuming’? not work. Give one example of each based on the household tasks undertaken by women in your home. d. The work that women do is less valued than that of men. 3. Make a list of toys and games that boys typically play and another for girls. If there is a difference between the two lists, can you think of some reasons why this is so? Does this have any relationship to the roles children have to play as adults? 4. If you have someone working as a domestic help in your house or locality talk to her and find out a little bit more about her life – Who are her family members?  Where is her home?  How many hours does she work?  How much does she get paid?  Write a small story based on these details. Glossary Identity: Identity is a sense of self-awareness of who one is. Typically, a person can have several identities. For example, a person can be a girl, a sister and a musician. Double-burden: Literally means a double load. This term is commonly used to describe the women’s work situation. It has emerged from a recognition that women typically labour both inside the home (housework) and outside. Care-giving: Care-giving refers to a range of tasks related to looking after and nurturing. Besides physical tasks, they also involve a strong emotional aspect. De-valued: When someone is not given due recognition for a task or job they have done, they can feel de-valued. For example, if a boy has put in a lot of effort into making a special birthday gift for his friend and this friend does not say anything about this, then the boy may feel de-valued. Chapter 4: Growing up as Boys and Girls 47