Chapter7 MOTION In everyday life, we see some objects at rest Activity ______________ 7.1 and others in motion. Birds fly, fish swim, blood flows through veins and arteries, and • Discuss whether the walls of your classroom are at rest or in motion. cars move. Atoms, molecules, planets, stars and galaxies are all in motion. We often Activity ______________ 7.2 perceive an object to be in motion when its • Have you ever experienced that the position changes with time. However, there train in which you are sitting appears are situations where the motion is inferred to move while it is at rest? through indirect evidences. For example, we • Discuss and share your experience. infer the motion of air by observing the movement of dust and the movement of leaves Think and Act and branches of trees. What causes the We sometimes are endangered by the phenomena of sunrise, sunset and changing motion of objects around us, especially of seasons? Is it due to the motion of the if that motion is erratic and earth? If it is true, why don’t we directly uncontrolled as observed in a flooded perceive the motion of the earth? river, a hurricane or a tsunami. On the An object may appear to be moving for other hand, controlled motion can be a one person and stationary for some other. For service to human beings such as in the the passengers in a moving bus, the roadside generation of hydro-electric power. Do trees appear to be moving backwards. A you feel the necessity to study the person standing on the road–side perceives erratic motion of some objects and the bus alongwith the passengers as moving. learn to control them? However, a passenger inside the bus sees his fellow passengers to be at rest. What do these 7.1 Describing Motion observations indicate? We describe the location of an object by Most motions are complex. Some objects specifying a reference point. Let us may move in a straight line, others may take understand this by an example. Let us a circular path. Some may rotate and a few assume that a school in a village is 2 km north others may vibrate. There may be situations of the railway station. We have specified the involving a combination of these. In this position of the school with respect to the chapter, we shall first learn to describe the railway station. In this example, the railway motion of objects along a straight line. We station is the reference point. We could have shall also learn to express such  motions also chosen other reference points according through simple equations and graphs. Later, to our convenience. Therefore, to describe the we shall discuss ways of describing position of an object we need to specify a circular motion. reference point called the origin. 2024-25 7.1.1 MOTION ALONG A STRAIGHT LINE = 60 km + 25 km = 85 km while the magnitude of displacement = 35 km. Thus, the magnitude The simplest type of motion is the motion of displacement (35 km) is not equal to the path along a straight line. We shall first learn to length (85 km). Further, we will notice that the describe this by an example. Consider the magnitude of the displacement for a course of motion of an object moving along a straight motion may be zero but the corresponding path. The object starts its journey from O distance covered is not zero. If we consider the which is treated as its reference point object to travel back to O, the final position (Fig. 7.1). Let A, B and C represent the position concides with the initial position, and therefore, of the object at different instants. At first, the the displacement is zero. However, the distance object moves through C and B and reaches A. covered in this journey is OA + AO = 60 km + Then it moves back along the same path and 60 km = 120 km. Thus, two different physical reaches C through B. quantities—the distance and the displacement, Fig. 7.1: Positions of an object on a straight line path The total path length covered by the object are used to describe the overall motion of an is OA + AC, that is 60 km + 35 km = 95 km. object and to locate its final position with This is the distance covered by the object. To reference to its initial position at a given time. describe distance we need to specify only the numerical value and not the direction of Activity ______________ 7.3 motion. There are certain quantities which • Take a metre scale and a long rope. are described by specifying only their • Walk from one corner of a basket-ball numerical values. The numerical value of a court to its oppposite corner along its physical quantity is its magnitude. From this sides. example, can you find out the distance of the • Measure the distance covered by you final position C of the object from the initial and magnitude of the displacement. position O? This difference will give you the • What difference would you notice numerical value of the displacement of the between the two in this case? object from O to C through A. The shortest Activity ______________ 7.4 distance measured from the initial to the final position of an object is known as • Automobiles are fitted with a device the displacement. that shows the distance travelled. Such Can the magnitude of the displacement be a device is known as an odometer. A equal to the distance travelled by an object? car is driven from Bhubaneshwar to Consider the example given in (Fig. 7.1). For New Delhi. The difference between the final reading and the initial reading of motion of the object from O to A,  the distance the odometer is 1850 km. covered is 60 km  and the magnitude of • Find the magnitude of the displacement displacement is also 60 km. During its motion between Bhubaneshwar and New Delhi from O to A and back to B, the distance covered by using the Road Map of India. MOTION 73 2024-25 uestions Table 7.1 1. An object has moved through a Time Distance Distance Q distance. Can it have zero travelled by travelled by displacement? If yes, support object A in m object  B in m your answer with an example. 9:30 am 10 12 2. A farmer moves along the 9:45 am 20 19 boundary of a square field of side 10:00 am 30 23 10 m in 40 s. What will be the magnitude of displacement of the 10:15 am 40 35 farmer at the end of 2 minutes 20 10:30 am 50 37 seconds from his initial position? 10:45 am 60 41 3. Which of the following is true for 11:00 am 70 44 displacement? (a) It cannot be zero. (b) Its magnitude is greater than 7.2 Measuring the Rate of Motion the distance travelled by the object. 7.1.2 UNIFORM MOTION AND NON- UNIFORM MOTION Consider an object moving along a straight line. Let it travel 5 m in the first second, 5 m more in the next second, 5 m in the third second and 5 m in the fourth second. In this case, the object covers 5 m in each second. As the object covers equal distances (a) in equal intervals of time, it is said to be in uniform motion. The time interval in this motion should be small. In our day-to-day life, we come across motions where objects cover unequal distances in equal intervals of time, for example, when a car is moving on a crowded street or a person is jogging in a park. These are some instances of non-uniform motion. Activity ______________ 7.5 • The data regarding the motion of two different objects A and B are given in Table 7.1. • Examine them carefully and state whether the motion of the objects is (b) uniform or non-uniform. Fig. 7.2 74 SCIENCE 2024-25 Look at the situations given in Fig. 7.2. If Total distance travelled the bowling speed is 143 km h–1 in Fig. 7.2(a) Average speed = Total time taken what does it mean? What do you understand from the signboard in Fig. 7.2(b)? 32 m Different objects may take different = 6 s = 5.33 m s–1 amounts of time to cover a given distance. Some of them move fast and some move Therefore, the average speed of the object is 5.33 m s–1. slowly. The rate at which objects move can be different. Also, different objects can move at the same rate. One of the ways of 7.2.1 SPEED WITH DIRECTION measuring the rate of motion of an object is to find out the distance travelled by the object The rate of motion of an object can be more in unit time. This quantity is referred to as comprehensive if we specify its direction of speed. The SI unit of speed is metre per motion along with its speed. The quantity that second. This is represented by the symbol specifies both these aspects is called velocity. m s–1 or m/s. The other units of speed include Velocity is the speed of an object moving in a centimetre per second (cm s–1) and kilometre definite direction. The velocity of an object per hour (km h–1). To specify the speed of an can be uniform or variable. It can be changed object, we require only its magnitude. The by changing the object’s speed, direction of speed of an object need not be constant. In motion or both. When an object is moving most cases, objects will be in non-uniform along a straight line at a variable speed, we motion. Therefore, we describe the rate of can express the magnitude of its rate of motion of such objects in terms of their motion in terms of average velocity. It is average speed. The average speed of an object calculated in the same way as we calculate is obtained by dividing the total distance average speed. travelled by the total time taken. That is, In case the velocity of the object is Total distance travelled changing at a uniform rate, then average average speed = Total time taken velocity is given by the arithmetic mean of initial velocity and final velocity for a given If an object travels a distance s in time t then period of time. That is, its speed v is, initial velocity + final velocity s average velocity = v = (7.1) 2 t Let us understand this by an example. A u + v car travels a distance of 100 km in 2 h. Its Mathematically, v   = (7.2) av average speed is 50 km h–1. The car might 2 not have travelled at 50 km h–1 all the time. where v  is the average velocity, u is the initial av Sometimes it might have travelled faster and velocity and v is the final velocity of the object. sometimes slower than this. Speed and velocity have the same units, that is, m s–1 or m/s. Example 7.1 An object travels 16 m in 4 s and then another 16 m in 2 s. What is Activity ______________ 7.6 the average speed of the object? • Measure the time it takes you to walk Solution: from your house to your bus stop or the school. If you consider that your Total distance travelled by the object = average walking speed is 4 km h–1, 16 m + 16 m = 32 m estimate the distance of the bus stop Total time taken = 4 s + 2 s = 6 s or school from your house. MOTION 75 2024-25 Activity 7.7 km 1000m 1h = 50 × × • At a time when it is cloudy, there may h 1km 3600s be frequent thunder and lightning. The sound of thunder takes some time to = 13.9 m s–1 reach you after you see the lightning. The average speed of the car is • Can you answer why this happens? 50 km h–1 or 13.9 m s–1. • Measure this time interval using a digital wrist watch or a stop watch. • Calculate the distance of the nearest Example 7.3 Usha swims in a 90 m long point of lightning. (Speed of sound in pool. She covers 180 m in one minute air = 346 m s-1.) by swimming from one end to the other and back along the same straight path. uestions Find the average speed and average velocity of Usha. 1. Distinguish between speed and Solution: Q velocity. Total distance covered by Usha in 1 min 2. Under what condition(s) is the is 180 m. magnitude of average velocity of Displacement of Usha in 1 min = 0 m an object equal to its average speed? Total distance covered Average speed = 3. What does the odometer of an Total timetaken automobile measure? 4. What does the path of an object 180m 180 m 1 min = = × look like when it is in uniform 1min 1min 60s motion? = 3 m s-1 5. During an experiment, a signal from a spaceship reached the Displacement ground station in five minutes. Average velocity = Total timetaken What was the distance of the spaceship from the ground 0m station? The signal travels at the = 60 s speed of light, that is, 3 × 108 m s–1. = 0 m s–1 The average speed of Usha is 3 m s–1 and her average velocity is 0 m s–1. Example 7.2 The odometer of a car reads 2000 km at the start of a trip and 2400 km at the end of the trip. If the 7.3 Rate of Change of Velocity trip took 8 h, calculate the average speed of the car in km h–1 and m s–1. During uniform motion of an object along a straight line,  the velocity remains constant Solution: with time. In this case, the change in velocity Distance covered by the car, of the object for any time interval is zero. s = 2400 km – 2000 km = 400 km However, in non-uniform motion, velocity Time elapsed, t = 8 h varies with time. It has different values at Average speed of the car is, different instants and at different points of the path. Thus, the change in velocity of the s 400 km v  =  = object during any time interval is not zero. av t 8 h Can we now express the change in velocity = 50 km h–1 of an object? 76 SCIENCE 2024-25 To answer such a question, we have to attain a velocity of 6 m s–1 in 30 s. Then introduce another physical quantity called he applies brakes such that the velocity acceleration, which is a measure of the of the bicycle comes down to 4 m s-1 in change in the velocity of an object per unit the next 5 s. Calculate the acceleration time. That is, of the bicycle in both the cases. change in velocity Solution: acceleration = time taken In the first case: If the velocity of an object changes from initial velocity, u = 0 ; an initial value u to the final value v in time final velocity, v = 6 m s–1 ; time, t = 30 s . t, the acceleration a is, From Eq. (8.3), we have v – u a = (7.3) v – u t a = t This kind of motion is known as Substituting the given values of u,v and accelerated motion. The acceleration is taken t in the above equation, we get to be positive if it is in the direction of velocity and negative when it is opposite to the ( –1 –1 6m s – 0m s ) direction of velocity. The SI unit of a = acceleration is m s–2 . 30 s If an object travels in a straight line and = 0.2 m s–2 its velocity increases or decreases by equal In the second case: amounts in equal intervals of time, then the initial velocity, u = 6 m s–1; acceleration of the object is said to be final velocity, v = 4 m s–1; uniform. The motion of a freely falling body time, t = 5 s. is an example of uniformly accelerated motion. On the other hand, an object can ( –1 –1 4m s – 6m s ) travel with non-uniform acceleration if its Then, a = 5 s velocity changes at a non-uniform rate. For example, if a car travelling along a straight = –0.4 m s–2 . road increases its speed by unequal amounts The acceleration of the bicycle in the in equal intervals of time, then the car is said first case is 0.2 m s–2 and in the second to be moving with non-uniform acceleration. case, it is –0.4 m s–2. Activity 7.8 • In your everyday life you come across uestions a range of motions in which (a) acceleration is in the direction of 1. When will you say a body is in motion, Q (i) uniform acceleration?  (ii) non(b) acceleration is against the uniform acceleration? direction of motion, 2. A bus decreases its speed from (c) acceleration is uniform, 80 km h–1 to 60 km h–1 in 5 s. (d) acceleration is non-uniform. Find the acceleration of the bus. • Can you identify one example each 3. A train starting from a railway for the above type of motion? station and moving with uniform acceleration attains a speed Example 7.4 Starting from a stationary 40 km h–1 in 10 minutes. Find position, Rahul paddles his bicycle to its acceleration. MOTION 77 2024-25 7.4 Graphical Representation of distance travelled by the object is directly proportional to time taken. Thus, for uniform Motion speed, a graph of distance travelled against time is a straight line, as shown in Fig. 7.3. Graphs provide a convenient method to The portion OB of the graph shows that the present basic information about a variety of distance is increasing at a uniform rate. Note events. For example, in the telecast of a that, you can also use the term uniform one-day cricket match, vertical bar graphs velocity in place of uniform speed if you take show the run rate of a team in each over. As the magnitude of displacement equal to the you have studied in mathematics, a straight distance travelled by the object along the line graph helps in solving a linear equation y-axis. having two variables. We can use the distance-time graph to To describe the motion of an object, we determine the speed of an object. To do so, can use line graphs. In this case, line graphs consider a small part AB of the distance-time show dependence of one physical quantity, graph shown in Fig 7.3. Draw a line parallel such as distance or velocity, on another to the x-axis from point A and another line quantity, such as time. parallel to the y-axis from point B. These two lines meet each other at point C to form a 7.4.1 DISTANCE–TIME GRAPHS triangle ABC. Now, on the graph, AC denotes the time interval (t – t ) while BC corresponds The change in the position of an object with 2 1 to the distance (s – s ). We can see from the time can be represented on the distance-time 2 1 graph that as the object moves from the point graph adopting a convenient scale of choice. A to B, it covers a distance (s – s ) in time In this graph, time is taken along the x–axis 2 1 (t – t ). The speed, v of the object, therefore and distance is taken along the y-axis. 2 1 can be represented as Distance-time graphs can be employed under various conditions where objects move with s – s 2 1 uniform speed, non-uniform speed, remain v  = (7.4) t – t 2 1 at rest etc. We can also plot the distance-time graph for accelerated motion. Table 7.2 shows the distance travelled by a car in a time interval of two seconds. Table 7.2: Distance travelled by a car at regular time intervals Time in seconds Distance in metres 0 0 2 1 4 4 Fig. 7.3: Distance-time graph of an object moving 6 9 with uniform speed 8 16 We know that when an object travels equal 10 25 distances in equal intervals of time, it moves with uniform speed. This shows that the 12 36 78 SCIENCE 2024-25 is represented along the y-axis. If the object moves at uniform velocity, the height of its velocity-time graph will not change with time (Fig. 7.5). It will be a straight line parallel to the x-axis. Fig. 7.5 shows the velocity-time graph for a car moving with uniform velocity of 40 km h–1. We know that the product of velocity and time give displacement of an object moving with uniform velocity. The area enclosed by velocity-time graph and the time axis will be equal to the magnitude of the displacement. To know the distance moved by the car between time t and t using Fig. 7.5, draw 1 2 perpendiculars from the points corresponding to the time t  and t2 on the graph. The velocity 1 of 40 km h–1 is represented by the height AC or BD and the time (t – t ) is represented by 2 1 the length AB. Fig. 7.4: Distance-time graph for a car moving with So, the distance s moved by the car in non-uniform speed time (t – t ) can be expressed as 2 1 s = AC × CD The distance-time graph for the motion = [(40 km h–1) × (t – t ) h] 2 1 of the car is shown in Fig. 7.4. Note that the = 40 (t – t ) km 2 1 shape of this graph is different from the earlier = area of the rectangle ABDC (shaded distance-time graph (Fig. 7.3) for uniform in Fig. 7.5). motion. The nature of this graph shows non- We can also study about uniformly linear variation of the distance travelled by accelerated motion by plotting its velocity– the car with time. Thus, the graph shown in time graph. Consider a car being driven along Fig 7.4 represents motion with non-uniform a straight road for testing its engine. Suppose speed. a person sitting next to the driver records its velocity after every 5 seconds by noting the 7.4.2 VELOCITY-TIME GRAPHS reading of the speedometer of the car. The velocity of the car, in km h–1 as well as in The variation in velocity with time for an object m s–1,  at different instants of time is shown moving in a straight line can be represented in table 7.3. by a velocity-time graph. In this graph, time is represented along the x-axis and the velocity Table 7.3: Velocity of a car at regular instants of time Time Velocity of the car –1 (s) (m s–1) (km h ) 0 0 0 5 2.5 9 10 5.0 18 15 7.5 27 20 10.0 36 Fig. 7.5: Velocity-time graph for uniform motion 25 12.5 45 of a car 30 15.0 54 MOTION 79 2024-25 In this case, the velocity-time graph for the motion of the car is shown in Fig. 7.6. The nature of the graph shows that velocity changes by equal amounts in equal intervals of time. Thus, for all uniformly accelerated motion, the velocity-time graph is a straight line. Fig. 7.7: Velocity-time graphs of an object in nonuniformly accelerated motion. Fig. 7.7(a) shows a velocity-time graph that Fig. 7.6: Velocity-time graph for a car moving with represents the motion of an object whose uniform accelerations. velocity is decreasing with time while Fig. 7.7 (b) shows the velocity-time graph You can also determine the distance representing the non-uniform variation of moved by the car from its velocity-time graph. velocity of the object with time. Try to interpret The area under the velocity-time graph gives these graphs. the distance (magnitude of displacement) Activity 7.9 moved by the car in a given interval of time. If the car would have been moving with • The times of arrival and departure of uniform velocity, the distance travelled by it a train at three stations A, B and C would be represented by the area ABCD and the distance of stations B and C under the graph (Fig. 7.6). Since the from station A are given in Table 7.4. magnitude of the velocity of the car is Table 7.4: Distances of stations B changing due to acceleration, the distance s and C from A and times of arrival travelled by the car will be given by the area and departure of the train ABCDE under the velocity-time graph (Fig. 7.6). Station Distance Time of Time of That is, from A arrival departure s = area ABCDE (km) (hours) (hours) = area of the rectangle ABCD + area of A 0 08:00 08:15 the triangle ADE B 120 11:15 11:30 1 C 180 13:00 13:15 = AB × BC + (AD × DE) 2 • Plot and interpret the distance-time In the case of non-uniformly accelerated graph for the train assuming that its motion, velocity-time graphs can have any motion between any two stations is shape. uniform. 80 SCIENCE 2024-25 –1 Velocity (km h ) Activity 7.10 4. What is the quantity which is measured by the area occupied • Feroz and his sister Sania go to school below the velocity-time graph? on their bicycles. Both of them start at the same time from their home but take different times to reach the school 7.5 Equations of Motion although they follow the same route. When an object moves along a straight line Table 7.5 shows the distance travelled by them in different times with uniform acceleration, it is possible to relate its velocity, acceleration during motion and the distance covered by it in a certain Table 7.5: Distance covered by time interval by a set of equations known as Feroz and Sania at different the equations of motion. For convenience, a times on their bicycles set of three such equations are given below: v = u + at (7.5) Time Distance Distance s = ut + ½ at2 (7.6) 2 as = v2 – u2 (7.7) travelled travelled where u is the initial velocity of the object which by Feroz by Sania moves with uniform acceleration a for time t, (km) (km) v is the final velocity, and s is the distance travelled by the object in time t. Eq. (7.5) 8:00 am 0 0 describes the velocity-time relation and Eq. 8:05 am 1.0 0.8 (7.6) represents the position-time relation. Eq. (7.7), which represents the relation between the 8:10 am 1.9 1.6 position and the velocity, can be obtained from 8:15 am 2.8 2.3 Eqs. (7.5) and (7.6) by eliminating t. These three equations can be derived by graphical 8:20 am 3.6 3.0 method. 8:25 am – 3.6 Example 7.5 A train starting from rest attains a velocity of 72 km h–1 in 5 • Plot the distance-time graph for their minutes. Assuming that the acceleration motions on the same scale and interpret. is uniform, find (i) the acceleration and (ii) the distance travelled by the train for attaining this velocity. uestions Solution: Q 1. What is the nature of the We have been given distance-time graphs for uniform u = 0 ; v = 72 km h–1 = 20 m s-1 and and non-uniform motion of an t = 5 minutes = 300 s. object? (i) From Eq. (7.5) we know that 2. What can you say about the motion of an object whose (v – u ) a = distance-time graph is a straight t line parallel to the time axis? 3. What can you say about the 20 m s–1 – 0 m s–1 = motion of an object if its speed- 300s time graph is a straight line 1 parallel to the time axis? = m s–2 15 MOTION 81 2024-25 (ii) From Eq. (7.7) we have Example 7.7 The brakes applied to a car 2 as = v2 – u2 = v2 – 0 produce an acceleration of 6 m s-2 in the Thus, opposite direction to the motion. If the 2 car takes 2 s to stop after the application v s = of  brakes, calculate the distance it 2a travels during this time. –1 2 (20 m s ) Solution: = –2 2×(1/15) m s We have been given a = – 6 m s–2  ; t = 2 s and v = 0 m s–1. = 3000 m From Eq. (7.5) we know that = 3 km v = u + at 1 0 = u + (– 6 m s–2) × 2 s The acceleration of the train is m s– 2 15       or u = 12 m s–1 . and the distance travelled is 3 km. From Eq. (7.6) we get 1 s = u t +  a t 2 Example 7.6 A car accelerates uniformly 2 –1 –1 from 18 km h  to 36 km h  in 5 s. 1 = (12 m s–1 ) × (2 s) +   (–6 m s–2 ) (2 s)2Calculate (i) the acceleration and (ii) the 2 distance covered by the car in that time. = 24 m – 12 m = 12 m Solution: Thus, the car will move 12 m before it We are given that stops after the application of brakes. Can u = 18 km h–1  = 5 m s–1 you now appreciate why drivers are v = 36 km h–1  = 10 m s–1 and cautioned to maintain some distance t = 5 s . between vehicles while travelling on the road? (i)   From Eq. (7.5) we have v – u a = uestions t 10 m s-1 – 5 m s-1 = 5s = 1 m s–2 Q 1. A bus starting from rest moves with a uniform acceleration of 0.1 m s-2  for 2 minutes. Find (a) the speed acquired, (b) the (ii) From Eq. (7.6) we have distance travelled. 1 2. A train is travelling at a speed s = u t + a t 2 2 of 90 km h–1. Brakes are applied so as to produce a uniform 1 = 5 m s–1 × 5 s + × 1 m s–2 × (5 s)2 acceleration of – 0.5 m s-2. Find 2 how far the train will go before it = 25 m + 12.5 m is brought to rest. 3. A trolley, while going down an = 37.5 m –2 inclined plane, has an The acceleration of the car is 1 m s  and acceleration of 2 cm s-2. What will the distance covered is 37.5 m. be its velocity 3 s after the start? 82 SCIENCE 2024-25 4. A racing car has a uniform straight parts AB, BC, CD and DA of the track. acceleration of 4 m s-2. What In order to keep himself on track, he quickly distance will it cover in 10 s after changes his speed at the corners. How many start? times will the athlete have to change his 5. A stone is thrown in a vertically direction of motion, while he completes one upward direction with a velocity round? It is clear that to move in a rectangular of 5 m s-1. If the acceleration of track once, he has to change his direction of the stone during its motion is 10 m s–2 in the downward direction, motion four times. what will be the height attained Now, suppose instead of a rectangular by the stone and how much time track, the athlete is running along a will it take to reach there? hexagonal shaped path ABCDEF, as shown in Fig. 7.8(b). In this situation, the athlete will 7.6 Uniform Circular Motion have to change his direction six times while he  completes one round. What if the track When the velocity of an object changes, we say was not a hexagon but a regular octagon, that the object is accelerating. The change in with eight equal sides as shown by the velocity could be due to change in its ABCDEFGH in Fig. 7.8(c)?  It is observed that magnitude or the direction of the motion or as the number of sides of the track increases both. Can you think of an example when an object does not change its magnitude of the athelete has to take turns more and more velocity but only its direction of motion? often. What would happen to the shape of the track as we go on increasing the number of sides indefinitely? If you do this you will notice that the shape of the track approaches the shape of a circle and the length of each of the sides will decrease to a point. If the athlete moves with a velocity of constant magnitude (a) Rectangular track (b) Hexagonal track along the circular path, the only change in his velocity is due to the change in the direction of motion. The motion of the athlete moving along a circular path is, therefore, an example of an accelerated motion. We know  that the circumference of a circle of radius r is given by 2πr . If the athlete takes t seconds to go once around the circular path (c) Octagonal shaped track (d) A circular track of radius r, the speed v is given by Fig. 7.8: The motion of an athlete along closed tracks 2πr v = of different shapes. t Let us consider an example of the motion (7.8) of a body along a closed path. Fig 8.9 (a) shows the path of an athlete along a When an object moves in a circular path rectangular track ABCD. Let us assume that with uniform speed, its motion is called the athlete runs at a uniform speed on the uniform circular motion. MOTION 83 2024-25 Activity 7.11 If you carefully note, on being released the stone moves along a straight line • Take a piece of thread and tie a small tangential to the circular path. This is piece of stone at one of its ends. Move because once the stone is released, it the stone to describe a circular path continues to move along the direction it has with constant speed by holding the thread at the other end, as shown in been moving at that instant. This shows that Fig. 7.9. the direction of motion changed at every point when the stone was moving along the circular path. When an athlete throws a hammer or a discus in a sports meet, he/she holds the hammer or the discus in his/her hand and gives it a circular motion by rotating his/ her own body. Once released in the desired Fig. 7.9: A stone describing a circular path with direction, the hammer or discus moves in a velocity of constant magnitude. the direction in which it was moving at the • Now, let the stone go by releasing the time it was released, just like the piece of thread. stone in the activity described above. There • Can you tell the direction in which are many more familiar examples of objects