CHAPTER 4 Working of Institutions OVERVIEW Democracy is not just about people electing their rulers. In a democracy the rulers have to follow some rules and procedures. They have to work with and within institutions. This chapter is about the working of such institutions in a democracy. We try to understand this by looking at the manner in which major decisions are taken and implemented in our country. We also look at how disputes regarding these decisions are resolved. In this process we come across three institutions that play a key role in major decisions – legislature, executive and judiciary. You have already read something about these institutions in earlier classes. Here we shall quickly summarise those and move on to asking larger questions. In the case of each institution we ask: What does this institution do? How is this institution connected to other institutions? What makes its functioning more or less democratic? The basic objective here is to understand how all these institutions together carry on the work of government. Sometimes we compare these with similar institutions in other democracies. In this chapter we take our examples from the working of the national level government called Central Government, Union Government, or just Government of India. While reading this chapter, you can think of and discuss examples from the working of the government in your state. 56 DEMOCRATIC POLITICS 2024-25 4.1 HOW IS A MAJOR POLICY DECISION TAKEN? A Government Order Pensions, signed the Order. It was On August 13, 1990, the Government quite short, barely one page. It of India issued an Order. It was looked like any ordinary circular or called an Office Memorandum. Like notice that you may have seen in all government orders, it had a num- school. The government issues hunber and is known by that: O. M. No. dreds of orders every day on differ36012/31/90-Est (SCT), dated ent matters. But this one was very 13.8.1990. The Joint Secretary, an important and became a source of officer in the Department of Person- controversy for several years. Let us nel and Training in the Ministry of see how the decision was taken and Personnel, Public Grievances and what happened later. WORKING OF INSTITUTIONS 57 2024-25 This Order announced a major So, were all these people involved policy decision. It said that 27 per in this decision regarding the Office cent of the vacancies in civil posts Memorandum? Let us find out. and services under the Government of India are reserved for the Socially and Educationally Backward Classes A C T I V I T Y (SEBC). SEBC is another name for all those people who belong to castes < Which points, other than the ones mentioned that are considered backward by the above, do you recall about these institutions Is every Office government. The benefit of job res- from the previous class? Discuss in class. Memorandum a ervation was till then available only < Can you think of a major decision made by major political to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled your state government? How were the Gover- decision? If not, Tribes. Now a new third category nor, the Council of Ministers, the state assem- what made this called SEBC was introduced. Only bly and the courts involved in that decision? one different? persons who belong to backward classes were eligible for this quota This Office Memorandum was the of 27 per cent jobs. Others could not culmination of a long chain of compete for these jobs. events. The Government of India had appointed the Second Backward The Decision Makers Classes Commission in 1979. It was Who decided to issue this headed by B.P. Mandal. Hence it was Memorandum? Clearly, such a big popularly called the Mandal decision could not have been taken Commission. It was asked to by the person who signed that determine the criteria to identify the document. The officer was merely socially and educationally backward implementing the instructions given classes in India and recommend by the Minister of Personnel, Public steps to be taken for their Grievances and Pensions, of which advancement. The Commission gave the Department was a part. We can its Report in 1980 and made many guess that such a major decision recommendations. One of these  was would have involved other major that 27 per cent of government jobs functionaries in our country. You be reserved for the socially and have already read in the previous educationally backward classes. class about some of them. Let us go The Report and recommendations over some of the main points that were discussed in the Parliament. you covered then: For several years, many < President is the head of the state parliamentarians and parties kept and is the highest formal authority demanding the implementation of in the country. the Commission’s recommendations. < Prime Minister is the head of the Then came the Lok Sabha election government and actually exercises of 1989. In its election manifesto, all governmental powers. He takes the Janata Dal promised that if voted most of the decisions in the to power, it would implement the Cabinet meetings. Mandal Commission report. The Now I can see < Parliament consists of the Janata Dal did form the government clearly! That is why President and two Houses, Lok after this election. Its leader V. P. they talk of Mandalisation of Sabha and Rajya Sabha. The Prime Singh became the Prime Minister. politics. Don’t they? Minister must have the support of Several developments took place a majority of Lok Sabha members. after that: 58 DEMOCRATIC POLITICS 2024-25 < The President of India in his were full of different views and address to the Parliament opinions on this issue. It led to read announced the intention of the widespread protests and counterthe government to implement the protests, some of which were violent. recommendations of the Mandal People reacted strongly because this image Commission. decision affected thousands of job < On 6 August 1990, the Union opportunities. Some felt that Cabinet took a formal decision to existence of inequalities among Reservation debate implement the recommendations. people of different castes in India was such an < Next day Prime Minister V.P. Singh necessitated job reservations. They impor tant issue during informed the Parliament about felt, this would give a fair 1990-91 that this decision through a statement opportunity to those communities adver tisers used this in both the Houses of Parliament. who so far had not adequately been theme to sell their < The decision of the Cabinet was represented in government products. Can you sent to the Department of Personnel employment. spot some references and Training. The senior officers of Others felt that this was unfair as to political events and the Department drafted an order in it would deny equality of opportunity debates in these Amul line with the Cabinet decision and to those who did not belong to Butter hoardings? took the minister’s approval. An backward communities. They would officer signed the order on behalf of be denied jobs even though they the Union Government. This was could be more qualified. Some felt how O.M. No. 36012/ 31/90 was that this would perpetuate caste born on 13 August 1990. feelings among people and hamper For the next few months, this was national unity. In this chapter we the most hotly debated issue in the won’t discuss whether the decision ©GCMMF India country. Newspapers and magazines was good or not. We only take this example to understand how major decisions are taken and implemented in the country. Who resolved this dispute? You know that the Supreme Court and the High Courts in India settle disputes arising out of governmental decisions. Some persons and associations opposed to this order filed a number of cases in the courts. They appealed to the courts to declare the order invalid and stop its implementation. The Supreme Court of India bunched all these cases together. This case was known as the ‘Indira Sawhney and others Vs Union of India case’. Eleven judges of the Supreme Court heard arguments of both sides. By a majority, the Supreme Court judges in 1992 declared that this order of the Government of India was valid. At the same time the Supreme Court asked the government to modify its WORKING OF INSTITUTIONS 59 2024-25 original order. It said that well-to- Personnel and Training issued do persons among the backward another Office Memorandum on classes should be excluded from 8 September 1993. The dispute getting the benefit of reservation. thus came to an end and this policy Accordingly, the Department of has been followed since then. Who did what in this case of reservations for backward classes? Supreme Court Made formal announcement about this decision Cabinet Implemented the decision by issuing an order CHECK President Go Took the decision to give 27% job reservations vernm YOUR ent Officials Upheld reservations as valid PROGRESS Need for Political Institutions of each institution. In the example We have seen one example of how above, we saw several such the government works. Governing a institutions at work. country involves various such < The Prime Minister and the activities. For example, the Cabinet are institutions that take government is responsible for all important policy decisions. ensuring security to the citizens and < The Civil Servants, working providing facilities for education together, are responsible for and health to all. It collects taxes taking steps to implement the and spends the money thus raised ministers’ decisions. on administration, defence and < Supreme Court is an institution development programmes. It where disputes between citizens formulates and implements several and the government are finally welfare schemes. Some persons have settled. to take decisions on how to go about Can you think of some other instithese activities. Others have to tutions in this example? What is implement these decisions. If their role? disputes arise on these decisions or Working with institutions is not in their implementation, there should easy. Institutions involve rules and be someone to determine what is regulations. This can bind the hands right and what is wrong. It is of leaders. Institutions involve important that everyone should meetings, committees and routines. know who is responsible for doing This often leads to delays and what. It is also important that these complications. Therefore dealing activities keep taking place even if with institutions can be frustrating. the persons in key positions change. One might feel that it is much better Which institutions So, to attend to all these tasks, to have one person take all decisions are at work in the several arrangements are made in without any rules, procedures and running of your all modern democracies. Such meetings. But that is not the spirit school? Would it arrangements are called institutions. of democracy. Some of the delays be better if one A democracy works well when these and complications introduced by person alone took institutions perform functions institutions are very useful. They all the decisions assigned to them. The Constitution provide an opportunity for a wider regarding of any country lays down basic set of people to be consulted in any management of rules on the powers and functions decision. Institutions make it your school? 60 DEMOCRATIC POLITICS 2024-25 difficult to have a good decision through a bad decision. That is why taken very quickly. But they also democratic governments insist on make it equally difficult to rush institutions. 4.2 PARLIAMENT In the example of the Office class and try to imagine what Memorandum, do you remember Parliament could have done if it did the role of Parliament? Perhaps not. not approve of the Cabinet’s Since this decision was not taken decision. by Parliament, you might think that Parliament had no role in it. But let Why do we need a us go back to the story and see Parliament? whether Parliament figures in it. Let In all democracies, an assembly of us recall the points made earlier by elected representatives exercises completing the following sentences: supreme political authority on < The Report of the Mandal behalf of the people. In India such a Commission was discussed … national assembly of elected < The President of India mentioned representatives is called Parliament. this in his … At the state level this is called < The Prime Minister made a … Legislature or Legislative Assembly. The decision was not directly taken The name may vary in different in Parliament. But Parliamentary countries, but such an assembly discussions on the Report influenced exists in every democracy. It and shaped the decision of the exercises political authority on government. They brought pressure behalf of the people in many ways: on the government to act on the Mandal recommendation. If 1 Parliament is the final authority for Parliament was not in favour of this making laws in any country. This decision, the Government could not task of law making or legislation have gone ahead with it. Can you is so crucial that these assemblies guess why? Recall what you read are called legislatures. Parliaments about Parliament in the earlier all over the world can make new laws, change existing laws, or abolish existing laws and make new ones in their place. 2 Parliaments all over the world exercise some control over those who run the government. In some countries like India this control is direct and full. Those who run the government can take decisions only so long as they enjoy support of Parliament. 3 Parliaments control all the money that governments have. In most countries the public money can be spent only when Parliament sanctions it. WORKING OF INSTITUTIONS 61 2024-25 Irfan Khan 4 Parliament is the highest forum of Which of the two Houses is more discussion and debate on public powerful? It might appear that the issues and national policy in any Rajya Sabha is more powerful, for country. Parliament can seek sometimes it is called the ‘Upper information about any matter. Chamber’ and the Lok Sabha the ‘Lower Chamber’. But this does not Two Houses of Parliament mean that Rajya Sabha is more What is the point in Since Parliament plays a central powerful than Lok Sabha. This is having so much role in modern democracies, most just an old style of speaking and not debate and large countries divide the role and the language used in our discussion in the powers of Parliament in two parts. Constitution. Parliament when They are called Chambers or Our Constitution does give the we know that the Houses. One House is usually Rajya Sabha some special powers view of the ruling directly elected by the people and over the states. But on most matters, party is going to exercises the real power on behalf the Lok Sabha exercises supreme prevail? of the people. The second House is power. Let us see how: usually elected indirectly and 1 Any ordinary law needs to be performs some special functions. passed by both the Houses. But if The most common work for the there is a difference between the second House is to look after the two Houses, the final decision is interests of various states, regions taken in a joint session in which or federal units. members of both the Houses sit In our country, Parliament together. Because of the larger consists of two Houses. The two number of members, the view of Houses are known as the Council of States (Rajya Sabha) and the House the Lok Sabha is likely to prevail of the People (Lok Sabha). The in such a meeting. President of India is a part of 2 Lok Sabha exercises more powers Parliament, although she is not a in money matters. Once the Lok member of either House. That is why Sabha passes the budget of the all laws made in the Houses come government or any other money into force only after they receive the related law, the Rajya Sabha assent of the President. cannot reject it. The Rajya Sabha You have read about the Indian can only delay it by 14 days or Parliament in earlier classes. From suggest changes in it. The Lok the Chapter 3 you know how Lok Sabha may or may not accept Sabha elections take place. Let us these changes. recall some key differences between the composition of these two Houses of Parliament. Answer the following A C T I V I T Y for the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha: When Parliament is in session, there is a special < What is the total number of programme everyday on Doordarshan about the members? … proceedings in Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha. Watch < Who elects the members? … the proceedings or read about it in the newspapers < What is the length of the term (in and note the following: years)? … < Powers of the two Houses of Parliament. < Can the House be dissolved or is < Role of the Speaker. it permanent? … < Role of the Opposition. 62 DEMOCRATIC POLITICS 2024-25 3 Most importantly, the Lok Sabha majority of the Lok Sabha members controls the Council of Ministers. say they have ‘no confidence’ in the Only a person who enjoys the Council of Ministers, all ministers support of the majority of the including the Prime Minister, have members in the Lok Sabha is to quit. The Rajya Sabha does not appointed the Prime Minister. If the have this power. A day in the life of the Lok Sabha 7 December 2004 was an ordinary day in the life of Railways in addition to that sanctioned in the the Fourteenth Lok Sabha. Let us take a look at what Railway Budget. happened in the course of that day. Identify the role The Minister of Human Resource Development and powers of the parliament on the basis of the introduced the National Commission for Minority proceedings for the day as given below. You can Educational Institutions Bill, 2004. He also gave a also enact this day in your classroom. statement explaining why the government had to bring an ordinance for this. 11:00 Various ministries gave written answers to about 250 12:14 Several members highlighted questions that were asked by some issues, including: members. These included: < What is the government’s policy on talking to < The vindictiveness of the Central Bureau of militant groups in Kashmir? Investigation (CBI) in registering cases against < What are the figures of atrocities against some leaders in the Tehelka case. Scheduled Tribes, including those inflicted by < Need to include Rajasthani as an official the police? language in the Constitution. < What is the government doing about over- < Need to renew the insurance policies of pricing of medicines by big companies? farmers and agricultural workers of Andhra Pradesh. 12:00 A large number of official documents were presented and were 2:26 Two bills proposed by the available for discussion. These government were considered and included: passed. These were: < Recruitment rules for the Indo-Tibetan Border < The Securities Laws (Amendment) Bill Police Force < The Enforcement of Security Interest and < Annual Repor t of the Indian Institute of Recovery of Debts Laws (Amendment) Bill Technology, Kharagpur < Report and accounts of Rashtriya Ispat Nigam 4:00 Finally, there was a long Limited, Visakhapatnam discussion regarding the foreign policy of the government and the 12:02 The Minister of Development need to continue an independent of North Eastern Region made a foreign policy in the context of the statement regarding Revitalisation of situation in Iraq. the North Eastern Council. The Minister of State for Railways presented a 7:17 Discussion concluded. House statement showing the grant needed by the adjourned for next day. WORKING OF INSTITUTIONS 63 2024-25 4.3 POLITICAL EXECUTIVE Do you remember the story of the executive in the case of the Office Office Memorandum with which we Memorandum? started this chapter? We found out You might ask: Why does the that the person who signed the political executive have more power document did not take this than the non-political executive? decision. He was only executing the Why is the minister more powerful policy decision taken by someone than the civil servant? The civil else. We noted the role of the Prime servant is usually more educated Minister in taking that decision. But and has more expert knowledge of we also know that he could not the subject. The advisors working in have taken that decision if he did the Finance Ministry know more not have support from the Lok Sabha. about economics than the Finance In that sense he was only executing Minister. Sometimes the ministers the wishes of the Parliament. may know very little about the Thus, at different levels of any technical matters that come under government we find functionaries their ministry. This could easily who take day-to-day decisions but happen in ministries like Defence, do not exercise supreme power on Industry, Health, Science and behalf of the people. All those Technology, Mines, etc. Why should functionaries are collectively known the minister have the final say on as the executive. They are called these matters? executive because they are in charge The reason is very simple. In a of the ‘execution’ of the policies of democracy the will of the people is the government. Thus, when we talk supreme. The minister is an elected about ‘the government’ we usually representative of the people and mean the executive. thus empowered to exercise the will of the people on their behalf. She is Political and Permanent finally answerable to the people for Executive all the consequences of her In a democratic country, two decision. That is why the minister categories make up the executive. takes all the final decisions. The One that is elected by the people for minister decides the overall a specific period, is called the framework and objectives in which political executive. Political leaders decisions on policy should be who take the big decisions fall in this made. The minister is not, and is not category. In the second category, expected to be, an expert in the people are  appointed on a long-term matters of her ministry. The basis. This is called the permanent minister takes the advice of experts executive or civil services. Persons on all technical matters. But very working in civil services are called often experts hold different opinions civil servants. They remain in office or place before her more than one even when the ruling party changes. option. Depending on what the These officers work under political overall objective is, the minister executive and assist them in decides. carrying out the day-to-day Actually this happens in any large administration. Can you recall the organisation. Those who understand role of political and non-political the overall picture take the most 64 DEMOCRATIC POLITICS 2024-25 important decisions, not the After the appointment of the Prime experts. The experts can tell the Minister, the President appoints route, but someone with a larger other ministers on the advice of the view decides the destination. In a Prime Minister. The Ministers are democracy elected ministers usually from the party or the perform this role. coalition that has the majority in the Prime Minister and Council Lok Sabha. The Prime Minister is of Ministers free to choose ministers, as long as Prime Minister is the most they are members of Parliament. read important political institution in the Sometimes, a person who is not a the country. Yet there is no direct member of Parliament can also election to the post of the Prime become a minister. But such a cartoon Minister. The President appoints the person has to get elected to one of Prime Minister. But the President the Houses of Parliament within six cannot appoint anyone she likes. months of appointment as minister. The race to become The President appoints the leader Council of Ministers is the official minister is not new. of the majority party or the coalition of parties that commands a majority name for the body that includes all Here is a cartoon depicting ministerial in the Lok Sabha, as Prime Minister. the Ministers. It usually has 60 to In case no single party or alliance 80 Ministers of different ranks. aspirants waiting to gets a majority, the President < Cabinet Ministers are usually topget a berth in Nehru’s appoints the person most likely to level leaders of the ruling party or Cabinet after the secure a majority support. The parties who are in charge of the 1962 elections. Why Prime Minister does not have a fixed major ministries. Usually the do you think political tenure. He continues in power so Cabinet Ministers meet to take leaders are so keen to long as he remains the leader of the become ministers? majority party or coalition. decisions in the name of the Council of Ministers. Cabinet is thus the inner ring of the Council of Ministers. It comprises about 25 ministers. < Ministers of State with indepen- dent charge are usually in-charge of smaller Ministries. They participate in the Cabinet meet- ings only when specially invited. < Ministers of State are attached to and required to assist Cabinet Ministers. Since it is not practical for all ministers to meet regularly and discuss everything, the decisions are taken in Cabinet meetings. That is why parliamentary democracy in most countries is often known as the Cabinet form of government. The Cabinet works as a team. The ministers may have different views and opinions, but everyone has to own up to every decision of the Cabinet. WORKING OF INSTITUTIONS 65 2024-25 ©Shankar. Don’t Spare Me No minister can openly criticise any decision of the government, even if it is about another Ministry or Department. Every ministry has secretaries, who are civil servants. The secretaries provide the necessary background information to the ministers to take decisions. The Cabinet as a team is assisted by the Cabinet Secretariat. This includes many senior civil servants who try to coordinate the working of different ministries. A C T I V I T Y who is the most powerful. The < List the names of five Cabinet Ministers and powers of the Prime Minister in all their ministries each at the Union level and in parliamentary democracies of the read your state. world have increased so much in the < Meet the Mayor or Municipal Chairperson of recent decades that parliamentary your town or the President of Zilla Parishad of democracies are some times seen as cartoon your district and ask him or her about how the Prime Ministerial form of city, town or district is administered. government. As political parties have come to play a major role in politics, This cartoon depicts Powers of the the Prime Minister controls the a cabinet meeting Prime Minister Cabinet and Parliament through the chaired by Prime The Constitution does not say very party. The media also contributes to Minister Indira Gandhi much about the powers of the Prime this trend by making politics and in early 1970s, at the Minister or the ministers or their elections as a competition between peak of her popularity. relationship with each other. But as top leaders of parties. In India too Do you think similar head of the government, the Prime we have seen such a tendency cartoons could be Minister has wide ranging powers. towards the concentration of powers drawn about other He chairs Cabinet meetings. He in the hands of the Prime Minister. prime ministers who coordinates the work of different Jawaharlal Nehru, the first Prime followed her? Departments. His decisions are final Minister of India, exercised in case disagreements arise between enormous authority because he had Departments. He exercises general great influence over the public. supervision of different ministries. Indira Gandhi was also a very All ministers work under his powerful leader compared to her leadership. The Prime Minister colleagues in the Cabinet. Of course, distributes and redistributes work the extent of power wielded by a to the ministers. He also has the Prime Minister also depends on the power to dismiss ministers. When personality of the person holding the Prime Minister quits, the entire that position. ministry quits. However, in recent years the rise Thus, if the Cabinet is the most of coalition politics has imposed powerful institution in India, within certain constraints on the power of the Cabinet it is the Prime Minister the Prime Minister. The Prime 66 DEMOCRATIC POLITICS 2024-25 ©R.K. Laxman, The Times of India Minister of a coalition government The President is not elected directly cannot take decisions as he likes. by the people. The elected Members He has to accommodate different of Parliament (MPs) and the elected groups and factions in his party as Members of the Legislative Why does this well as among alliance partners. He Assemblies (MLAs) elect her. A book refer to the also has to heed to the views and candidate standing for President’s President as ‘she’? positions of the coalition partners post has to get a majority of votes to Have we ever had and other parties, on whose support win the election. This ensures that a woman President the survival of the government the President can be seen to represent in our country? depends. the entire nation. At the same time the President can never claim the kind of direct popular mandate that the The President Prime Minister can. This ensures that While the Prime Minister is the head she remains only a nominal executive. of the government, the President is The same is true of the powers of Did you protest the head of the State. In our political the President. If you casually read when the book system the head of the State exercises the Constitution you would think referred to the Prime Minister as only nominal powers. The President of that there is nothing that she cannot ‘he’? Have we not India is like the Queen of Britain whose do. All governmental activities take had a woman functions are to a large extent place in the name of the President. Prime Minister? ceremonial. The President supervises All laws and major policy decisions Why should we the overall functioning of all the political of the government are issued in her assume that all the institutions in the country so that they name. All major appointments are important positions operate in harmony to achieve the are held by men? made in the name of the President. objectives of the State. These include the appointment of The President, Shri Ram Nath Kovind administering the oath of office of the Prime Minister to Shri Narendra Modi, at a Swearing-in Ceremony, at Rashtrapati Bhavan on 30 May 2019. WORKING OF INSTITUTIONS 67 2024-25 Press Information Bureau the Chief Justice of India, the When no party or coalition gets a Judges of the Supreme Court and majority in the Lok Sabha, the the High Courts of the states, the President exercises her discretion. Governors of the states, the Election The President appoints a leader who Commissioners, ambassadors to in her opinion can muster majority read other countries, etc. All international support in the Lok Sabha. In such a the treaties and agreements are made in case, the President can ask the the name of the President. The newly appointed Prime Minister to image President is the supreme prove majority support in the Lok commander of the defence forces of Sabha within a specified time. India. But we should remember that the The Presidential System President exercises all these powers only on the advice of the Council of Presidents all over the world are not always nomiMinisters. The President can ask the nal executives like the President of India. In many Council of Ministers to reconsider its countries of the world, the President is both the advice. But if the same advice is head of the state and the head of the government. given again, she is bound to act The President of the United States of America is according to it. Similarly, a bill the most well known example of this kind of Presipassed by the Parliament becomes dent. The US President is directly elected by the a law only after the President gives people. He personally chooses and appoints all assent to it. If the President wants, Ministers. The law making is still done by the legshe can delay this for some time and islature (called the Congress in the US), but the send the bill back to Parliament for president can veto any law. Most importantly, the reconsideration. But if Parliament president does not need the support of the majorpasses the bill again, she has to ity of members in the Congress and neither is he sign it. answerable to them. He has a fixed tenure of four So you may wonder what does the years and completes it even if his par ty does not President really do? Can she do have a majority in the Congress. What is better for a anything on her own at all? There is This model is followed in most of the countries democracy: A one very important thing she should of Latin America and many of the ex-Soviet Union Prime Minister who do on her own: appoint the Prime countries. Given the centrality of the President, can do whatever Minister. When a party or coalition this system of government is called the Presiden- he wishes or a of parties secures a clear majority Prime Minister who tial form of government. In countries like ours that in the elections, the President, has needs to consult follow the British model, the parliament is suto appoint the leader of the majority other leaders and preme. Therefore our system is called the parliaparty or the coalition that enjoys parties? majority support in the Lok Sabha. mentary system of government. Eliamma, Annakutti and Marymol read the section on the President. Each of them had a question. Can you help them in answering these questions? Eliamma: What happens if the President and the Prime Minister disagree about some policy? Does the view of the Prime Minister always prevail? CHECK Annakutti: I find it funny that the President is the Supreme Commander of Armed Forces. I doubt if the YOUR President can even lift a heavy gun. What is the point in making the President the Commander? PROGRESS Marymol: I would say, what is the point in having a President at all if all the real powers are with the Prime Minister? 68 DEMOCRATIC POLITICS 2024-25 4.4 THE JUDICIARY It is quite common in Let us return, one final time, to the A C T I V I T Y the US for judges to story of Office Memorandum that we be nominated on the started with. This time let us not basis of well-known recall the story, but imagine how Follow the news about any major cour t case in a political opinions and different the story could have been. High Cour t or the Supreme Court. What was the affiliations. This Remember, the story came to a original verdict? Did the High Cour t or the fictitious satisfactory end because the Supreme Court change it? What was the reason? advertisement Supreme Court gave a verdict that appeared in the US in was accepted by everyone. Imagine This is why an independent and 2005 when President what would have happened in the powerful judiciary is considered Bush was considering following situations: essential for democracies. All the various candidates for < If there was nothing like a courts at different levels in a country nomination to the US Supreme Court in the country. put together are called the judiciary. supreme court. What < Even if there was a Supreme The Indian judiciary consists of a does this cartoon say Court, if it had no power to judge Supreme Court for the entire nation, about the actions of the government. High Courts in the states, District independence of the < Even if it had the power, if no one Courts and the courts at local level. judiciary? Why do trusted the Supreme Court to give India has an integrated judiciary. It such cartoons not a fair verdict. means the Supreme Court controls appear in our < Even if it gave a fair judgement, if the judicial administration in the country? Does this those who appealed against the country. Its decisions are binding on demonstrate the Government Order did not accept all other courts of the country. It can independence of our the judgement. take up any dispute judiciary? < Between citizens of the country; < Between citizens and government; < Between two or more state governments; and < Between governments at the union and state level. It is the highest court of appeal in civil and criminal cases. It can hear appeals against the decisions of the High Courts. Independence of the judiciary means that it is not under the control of the legislature or the executive. The judges do not act on the direction of the government or according to the wishes of the party in power. That is why all modern democracies have courts that are independent of the legislature and the executive. India has achieved this. The judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts are appointed by the President on the advice of the Prime Minister and in WORKING OF INSTITUTIONS 69 2024-25 ©M.E. Cohen, National, Cagle Cartoons Inc. consultation with the Chief Justice Constitution. Thus they can of the Supreme Court. In practice it determine the Constitutional now means that the senior judges validity of any legislation or action of the Supreme Court select the new of the executive in the country, judges of the Supreme Court and the when it is challenged before them. High Courts. There is very little scope This is known as the judicial review. for interference by the political The Supreme Court of India has also executive. The senior most judge of ruled that the core or basic Why are people the Supreme Court is usually principles of the Constitution cannot allowed to go to appointed the Chief Justice. Once be changed by the Parliament. courts against the a person is appointed as judge of the The powers and the independence government’s Supreme Court or the High Court it of the Indian judiciary allow it to act decisions? is nearly impossible to remove him as the guardian of the Fundamental or her from that position. It is as Rights. We shall see in the next difficult as removing the President chapter that the citizens have a of India. A judge can be removed right to approach the courts to seek only by an impeachment motion remedy in case of any violation of passed separately by two-thirds their rights. In recent years the members of the two Houses of the Courts have given several Parliament. It has never happened judgments and directives to protect in the history of Indian democracy. public interest and human rights. The judiciary in India is also one Any one can approach the courts if of the most powerful in the world. public interest is hurt by the actions The Supreme Court and the High of government. This is called public Courts have the power to interpret interest litigation. The courts the Constitution of the country. They intervene to prevent the misuse of can declare invalid any law of the the government’s power to make legislature or the actions of the decisions. They check malpractices executive, whether at the Union on the part of public officials. That is level or at the state level, if they find why the judiciary enjoys a high level such a law or action is against the of confidence among the people. Give one reason each to argue that Indian judiciary is independent with respect to: CHECK Appointment of judges: … Removal of judges: … YOUR Powers of the judiciary: … PROGRESS The Chief Justice of India, Shri Justice J.S. Khehar administering the oath of the office of the President of India to Shri Ram Nath Kovind, at a swearing-in ceremony in the Central Hall of Parliament in New Delhi on 25 July 2017. 70 DEMOCRATIC POLITICS 2024-25 Coalition government: A government formed by an alliance of two or more political parties, usually when no single party enjoys majority support of the members in a legislature. GLOSSARY Executive: A body of persons having authority to initiate major policies, make decisions and implement them on the basis of the Constitution and laws of the country. Government: A set of institutions that have the power to make, implement and interpret laws so as to ensure an orderly life. In its broad sense, government administers and supervises over citizens and resources of a country. Judiciary: An institution empowered to administer justice and provide a mechanism for the resolution of legal disputes. All the courts in the country are collectively referred to as judiciary. Legislature: An assembly of people’s representatives with the power to enact laws for a country. In addition to enacting laws, legislatures have authority to raise taxes and adopt the budget and other money bills. Office Memorandum: A communication issued by an appropriate authority stating the policy or decision of the government. Political Institution: A set of procedures for regulating the conduct of government and political life in the country. Reservations: A policy that declares some positions in government employment and educational institutions ‘reserved’ for people and communities who have been discriminated against, are disadvantaged and backward. State: Political association occupying a definite territory, having an organised government and possessing power to make domestic and foreign policies. Governments may change, but the state continues. In common speech, the terms country, nation and state are used as synonyms. exercises 1 If you are elected as the President of India which of the following decision can you take on your own? a Select the person you like as Prime Minister. b Dismiss a Prime Minister who has a majority in Lok Sabha. c Ask for reconsideration of a bill passed by both the Houses. d Nominate the leaders of your choice to the Council of Ministers. 2 Who among the following is a part of the political executive? a District Collector b Secretary of the Ministry of Home Affairs c Home Minister d Director General of Police 3 Which of the following statements about the judiciary is false? a Every law passed by the Parliament needs approval of the Supreme Court b Judiciary can strike down a law if it goes against the spirit of the