CHAPTER 1 What is Democracy? Why Democracy? OVERVIEW What is democracy? What are its features? This chapter builds on a simple definition of democracy. Step by step, we work out the meaning of the terms involved in this definition. The aim here is to understand clearly the bare minimum features of a democratic form of government. After going through this chapter we should be able to distinguish a democratic form of government from a non-democratic government. Towards the end of this chapter, we step beyond this minimal objective and introduce a broader idea of democracy. Democracy is the most prevalent form of government in the world today and it is expanding to more countries. But why is it so? What makes it better than other forms of government? That is the second big question that we take up in this chapter. 2024-25 1.1 WHAT IS DEMOCRACY? You have already read about different But we don’t know if this is the best way of forms of government. On the basis of defining unless we think about it ourselves. We your understanding of democracy must not accept something just because it is so far, mentioning a few examples famous, just because everyone accepts it. write down some common features of: Yolanda: Ma’am, can I suggest something? We don’t < Democratic governments need to look for any definition. I read somewhere < Non-democratic governments that the word democracy comes from a Greek word ‘Demokratia’. In Greek ‘demos’ means Why define democracy? people and ‘kratia’ means rule. So democracy is rule by the people. This is the correct meaning. Before we proceed further, let us Where is the need to debate? first take note of an objection by Lyngdoh Madam: That is also a very helpful way Merry. She does not like this way of thinking about this matter. I would just say of defining democracy and wants that this does not always work. A word does not to ask some basic questions. remain tied to its origin. Just think of computers. Her teacher Matilda Lyngdoh Originally they were used for computing, that is to responds to her questions, as other say calculating, very difficult mathematical sums. classmates join the discussion: These were very powerful calculators. But nowaMerry: Ma’am, I don’t like this idea. First we spend days very few people use computers for computtime discussing democracy and then we want ing sums. They use it for writing, for designing, for to find out the meaning of democracy. I mean listening to music and for watching films. Words logically shouldn’t we have approached it the remain the same but their meaning can change other way round? Shouldn’t the meaning have with time. In that case it is not very useful to look come first and then the example? at the origins of a word. Lyngdoh Madam: I can see your point. But that is Merry: Ma’am, so basically what you are saying not how we reason in everyday life. We use is that there is no shortcut to our thinking about words like pen, rain or love. Do we wait to have the matter ourselves. We have to think about its a definition of these words before we use them? meaning and evolve a definition. Come to think of it, do we have clear definition Lyngdoh Madam: You got me right. Let us get on of these words? It is only by using a word that with it now. we understand its meaning. Merry: But then why do we need definitions at all? A C T I V I T Y Lyngdoh Madam: We need a definition only when we come across a difficulty in the use of a word. We need a definition of rain only when we wish to Let us take Lyngdoh Madam seriously and try to I have heard a distinguish it from, say, drizzle or cloudburst. The write down the exact definition of some of the different version. same is true for democracy. We need a clear simple words that we use all the time: pen, rain Democracy is off definition only because people use it for different and love. For example, is there a way of defining a the people, far purposes, because very different kinds of gov- pen that distinguishes it clearly from a pencil, a (from) the people ernments call themselves democracy. brush, a chalk or crayon. and (where they) Ribiang: But why do we need to work on a defini- < What have you learnt from this attempt? buy the people. tion? The other day you quoted Abraham < What does it teach us about understanding the Why don’t we Lincoln to us: “Democracy is government of meaning of democracy? accept that? the people, by the people and for the people”. We in Meghalaya always ruled ourselves. That is accepted by everyone. Why do we need to A simple definition change that? Let us get back to our discussion on Lyngdoh Madam: I am not saying we need to similarities and differences among change it. I too find this definition very beautiful. governments that are called 2 DEMOCRATIC POLITICS 2024-25 democracies. One simple factor because they happen to be born into common to all democracies is: the the royal family. government is chosen by the people. This simple definition is not We could thus start with a simple adequate. It reminds us that definition: democracy is a form of democracy is people’s rule. But if we government in which the rulers are use this definition in an unthinking elected by the people. manner, we would end up calling This is a useful starting point. This almost every government that holds definition allows us to separate an election a democracy. That would democracy from forms of government be very misleading. As we shall find that are clearly not democratic. The out in Chapter 3, every government army rulers of Myanmar were not in contemporary world wants to be elected by the people. Those who called a democracy, even if it is not happened to be in control of the army so. That is why we need to carefully became the rulers of the country. distinguish between a government People had no say in this decision. that is a democracy and one that Dictators like Pinochet (Chile) are not pretends to be one. We can do so by elected by the people. This also understanding each word in this applies to monarchies. The kings of definition carefully and spelling out Saudi Arabia rule not because the the features of a democratic people have chosen them to do so but government. Ribiang went back home and collected some more famous quotations on democracy. This time she did not mention the names of the people who said or wrote these. She wants you to read these and CHECK comment on how good or useful these thoughts are: < Democracy gives every man the right to be his own oppressor. YOUR < Democracy consists of choosing your dictators after they’ve told you what you think it is you want to hear. PROGRESS < Man’s capacity for justice makes democracy possible, but man’s inclination to injustice makes democracy necessary < Democracy is a device that insures we shall be governed no better than we deserve. < All the ills of democracy can be cured by more democracy. read the cartoon This cartoon was drawn when elections were held in Iraq with the presence of US and other foreign powers. What do you think this cartoon is saying? Why is ‘democracy’ written the way it is? WHAT IS DEMOCRACY? WHY DEMOCRACY? 3 2024-25 ©Stephane Peray, Thailand, Cagle Cartoons Inc. 1.2 FEATURES OF DEMOCRACY We have started with a simple want in a democracy? Or must a definition that democracy is a form democratic government function of government in which the rulers with some limits? Is it necessary are elected by the people. This for a democracy to respect some raises many questions: rights of the citizens? < Who are the rulers in this Let us consider each of these definition? Which officials must questions with the help of some be elected for any government to examples. be called a democracy? Which decisions may be taken by non- Major decisions by elected elected officials in a democracy? l e a d e r s < What kind of election constitutes In Pakistan, General Pervez a democratic election? What Musharraf led a military coup in conditions must be fulfilled for an October 1999. He overthrew a election to be considered democratically elected government democratic? and declared himself the ‘Chief < Who are the people who can elect Executive’ of the country. Later he the rulers or get elected as rulers? changed his designation to President Should this include every citizen on and in 2002 held a referendum in an equal basis? Can a democracy the country that granted him a fivedeny some citizens this right? year extension. Pakistani media, < Finally, what kind of a form of human rights organisations and government is democracy? Can democracy activists said that the elected rulers do whatever they referendum was based on read the cartoon Syria is a small west Asian country. The ruling Ba’ath Party and some of its small allies are the only par ties allowed in that country. Do you think this cartoon could apply to China or Mexico? What does the crown of leaves on democracy signify? 4 DEMOCRATIC POLITICS 2024-25 ©Emad Hajjaj, Jordan, Cagle Cartoons Inc. 7 June 2005 rulers. They cannot take the final read decisions. The power to take final decision rested with army officials the and with General Musharraf, and cartoon none of them were elected by the people. This happens in many dictatorships and monarchies. They This cartoon was formally have an elected parliament drawn in the context and government but the real power of Latin America. Do is with those who are not elected. you think it applies to In a few countries, the real power the Pakistani situation was with some external powers and as well? Think of not with locally elected other countries where representatives. This cannot be this could apply? called people’s rule. Does this happen This gives us the first feature. In a sometimes in our democracy the final decisioncountry as well? making power must rest with those elected by the people. malpractices and fraud. In August Free and fair electoral 2002 he issued a ‘Legal Framework c o m p e t i t i o n Order’ that amended the Constitution of Pakistan. According In China, elections are regularly to this Order, the President can held after every five years for dismiss the national and provincial electing the country’s parliament, assemblies. The work of the civilian called Quanguo Renmin Daibiao cabinet is supervised by a National Dahui (National People’s Congress). Security Council which is The National People’s Congress has dominated by military officers. After the power to appoint the President passing this law, elections were of the country. It has nearly 3,000 held to the national and provincial members elected from all over assemblies. So Pakistan has had China. Some members are elected elections, elected representatives by the army. Before contesting have some powers. But the final elections, a candidate needs the power rested with military officers approval of the Chinese Communist and General Musharraf himself. Party. Only those who are members Clearly, there are many reasons of the Chinese Communist Party or why Pakistan under General eight smaller parties allied to it were All this is so remote Musharraf should not be called a allowed to contest elections held in for me. Is democracy. But let us focus on one 2002-03. The government is always democracy all of these. Can we say that the rulers formed by the Communist Party. about rulers and are elected by the people in Since its independence in 1930, governments? Can Pakistan? Not quite. People may Mexico holds elections after every we talk about a have elected their representatives to six years to elect its President. The democratic the national and provincial country has never been under a classroom? Or a assemblies but those elected military or dictator’s rule. But until democratic family? representatives were not really the 2000 every election was won by a WHAT IS DEMOCRACY? WHY DEMOCRACY? 5 2024-25 ©Ares, Caglecartoon.com, Cagle Cartoons Inc. 22 January 2005 party called PRI (Institutional Revolutionary Party). Opposition read parties did contest elections, but never managed to win. The PRI was the known to use many dirty tricks to win elections. All those who were cartoon employed in government offices had to attend its party meetings. This cartoon was Teachers of government schools titled ‘Building used to force parents to vote for the Democracy’ and was PRI. Media largely ignored the first published in a activities of opposition political Latin American parties except to criticise them. publication. What do Sometimes the polling booths were moneybags signify shifted from one place to another in here? Could this the last minute, which made it cartoon be applied to difficult for people to cast their votes. India? The PRI spent a large sum of money in the campaign for its candidates. Should we consider the elections described above as examples of people electing their rulers? Reading these examples we get a sense that One person, one vote, we cannot. There are many problems one value here. In China the elections do not Earlier, we read about how the struggle offer the people any serious choice. for democracy was linked to the They have to choose the ruling party demand for universal adult franchise. and the candidates approved by it. This principle has now come to be Can we call this a choice? In the accepted almost all over the world. Yet Mexican example, people seemed to there are many instances of denial of really have a choice but in practice equal right to vote. they had no choice. There was no < Until 2015, in Saudi Arabia women way the ruling party could be did not have the right to vote. defeated, even if people were against < Estonia has made its citizenship it. These are not fair elections. rules in such a way that people We can thus add a second feature belonging to Russian minority find it difficult to get the right to to our understanding of democracy. vote. Holding elections of any kind is not < In Fiji, the electoral system is sufficient. The elections must offer such that the vote of an a real choice between political indigenous Fiji has more value alternatives. And it should be than that of an Indian-Fijian. possible for people to use this choice Democracy is based on a to remove the existing rulers, if they fundamental principle of political wish so. So, a democracy must be equality. That gives us the third based on a free and fair election feature of democracy: in a where those currently in power democracy, each adult citizen must have a fair chance of losing. We have one vote and each vote must shall find out more about a have one value. We shall read more democratic election in Chapter 3. about it in Chapter 3. 6 DEMOCRATIC POLITICS 2024-25 ©Nerilicon, El Economista , Mexico, Cagle Cartoons Inc. 17 May 2005 read the cartoon This cartoon is about the Iraqi election held after Saddam Hussein’s regime was over thrown. He is shown behind the bars. What is the car toonist saying here? Compare the message of this cartoon with the first cartoon in this chapter. Rule of law and respect government harassed those for rights journalists who went against it. The Zimbabwe attained independence government ignored some court from White minority rule in 1980. judgments that went against it and Since then the country has been pressurised judges. He was forced ruled by ZANU-PF, the party that led out of office in 2017. the freedom struggle. Its leader, The example of Zimbabwe shows Robert Mugabe, ruled the country that popular approval of the rulers is since independence. Elections were necessary in a democracy, but it is held regularly and always won by not sufficient. Popular governments ZANU-PF. President Mugabe was can be undemocratic. Popular leaders popular but also used unfair practices can be autocratic. If we wish to assess in elections. Over the years his a democracy, it is important to look government changed the constitution at the elections. But it is equally several times to increase the powers important to look before and after the of the President and make him less elections. There should be sufficient accountable. Opposition party room for normal political activity, workers were harassed and their including political opposition, in the meeting disrupted. Public protests period before elections. This requires and demonstrations against the that the state should respect some Why talk about government were declared illegal. basic rights of the citizen. They should Zimbabwe? I read There was a law that limited the right be free to think, to have opinions, to similar reports from to criticise the President. Television express these in public, to form many parts of our and radio were controlled by the associations, to protest and take other own country. Why government and gave only the political actions. Everyone should be don’t we discuss ruling party’s version. There were equal in the eyes of law. These rights that? independent newspapers but the must be protected by an independent WHAT IS DEMOCRACY? WHY DEMOCRACY? 7 2024-25 ©John Trever, Albuquerque Journal, US, Cagle Cartoons Inc. judiciary whose orders are obeyed by Summary definition everyone. We shall read more about Let us sum up the discussion so far. these rights in Chapter 5. We started with a simple definition Similarly, there are some conditions that democracy is a form of that apply to the way a government government in which the rulers are is run after the elections. A elected by the people. We found that read democratic government cannot do this definition was not adequate whatever it likes, simply because it the unless we explained some of the key has won an election. It has to respect words used in it. Through a series of cartoon some basic rules. In particular it has examples we worked out four features to respect some guarantees to the of democracy as a form of minorities. Every major decision has government. Accordingly, democracy Chinese government to go through a series of is a form of government in which: blocked free flow of consultations. Every office bearer has < Rulers elected by the people take information on the certain rights and responsibilities all the major decisions; internet by placing assigned by the constitution and the < Elections offer a choice and fair restrictions on popular law. Each of these is accountable not opportunity to the people to websites like ‘Google’ only to the people but also to other change the current rulers; and ‘Yahoo’. The independent officials. We shall read < This choice and opportunity is image of tanks and an more about this in Chapter 4. available to all the people on an unarmed student Both these aspects give us the fourth equal basis; and reminds the reader of and final feature of democracy: < The exercise of this choice leads another major event in a democratic government rules to a government limited by basic recent Chinese within limits set by constitutional rules of the constitution and history. Find out about law and citizens’ rights. citizens’ rights. that event. 8 DEMOCRATIC POLITICS 2024-25 ©Eric Allie, Pioneer Press, US, Cagle Cartoons Inc., 27 February 2006 Read these five examples of working or denial of democracy. Match each of these with the relevant feature of democracy discussed above. CHECK Example Feature YOUR King of Bhutan has declared that in future he will be Rule of law guided by the advice given to him by elected representatives. PROGRESS Many Tamil workers who migrated from India were Respect for Rights not given a right to vote in Sri Lanka. One person one vote The king imposed a ban on political gatherings, one value demonstrations and rallies. Free and fair The Indian Supreme Court held that the dissolution of electoral competition Bihar assembly was unconstitutional. Major decisions by Political parties in Bangladesh have agreed that a neutral elected leaders government should rule the country at the time of elections. 1.3 WHY DEMOCRACY? An argument broke out in Madam Jeni: Whatever, how does it make a difference? Lyngdoh’s class. She had finished The point is that this can’t be the best form of teaching the previous section on government. Democracy is all about chaos, inwhat is democracy and asked the stability, corruption and hypocrisy. Politicians students if they thought democracy fight among themselves. Who cares for the counwas the best form of government. try? Everyone had something to say. Poimon: So, what should we have instead? Go back to the British rule? Invite some kings to Debating merits of rule this country? d e m o c r a c y Rose: I don’t know. I think what this country needs is a strong leader, someone who does not have Yolanda: We live in a democratic country. All over to bother about elections and parliament. One the world people want democracy. Countries that leader should have all the powers. He should were not democratic earlier are becoming demo- be able to do whatever is needed in country’s cratic now. All great people have said nice things interest. That alone can remove corruption and about democracy. Isn’t it obvious that democracy pover ty from this country. is the best? Do we need to debate this? Someone shouted: That is called dictatorship! Tangkini: But Lyngdoh Madam had said we should Hoi: What if that person starts using all these pownot accept something just because it is famous, ers for himself and his family? What if he is just because everyone else accepts it. Isn’t it corrupt himself? possible that everyone is following a wrong Rose: I am speaking only of the honest, sincere path? and strong leader. Jeni: Yes, it actually is a wrong path. What has Hoi: But that is not fair. You are comparing a real democracy brought to our country? Seven democracy with an ideal dictatorship. I want to be in decades of democracy and there is so much We should compare an ideal with an ideal, the Lyngdoh Madam’s pover ty in the country. real with the real. Go and check the record of class! That sounds Ribiang: But what has democracy got to do with dictators in real life. They are most corrupt, selflike a democratic it? Do we have poverty because we are demo- ish and brutal. It is just that we don’t get to know classroom. cratic or do we have pover ty despite being a about this. And what is worse, you can’t even Doesn’t it? democracy? get rid of them. WHAT IS DEMOCRACY? WHY DEMOCRACY? 9 2024-25 Madam Lyngdoh was listening to people take their own decisions. this discussion with interest. Now This does not guarantee that their she stepped in: “I was delighted to decisions will be good. People can This cartoon is from see you all arguing so passionately. make mistakes. Involving the people Brazil, a country that I don’t know who is right and who in these decisions does lead has long experience is wrong. That is for you to settle. to delays in decision making. It of dictatorship.  It is But I did feel that you all wanted to is also true that democracy leads entitled “The Hidden speak your mind. You may have felt to frequent changes in leadership. Side of Dictatorship”. very bad if someone tried to stop you Sometimes this can set back Which hidden sides or if someone punished you for big decisions and affect the does this cartoon saying what you felt. Would you be government’s efficiency. depict? Is it able to do that in a country that is These arguments show that necessary for every not democratic? Is that a good democracy of the kind we see may dictatorship to have a argument for democracy?” not be the ideal form of government. hidden side? If But that is not a question we face in possible, find this out Arguments against democracy real life. The real question we face about the dictators This conversation has most of the is different: is democracy better than including Pinochet in arguments that we routinely hear other forms of government that are Chile, Jaruzelski in against democracy. Let us go over there for us to choose from? Poland, Sani Abacha some of these arguments: in Nigeria and < Leaders keep changing in a Arguments for democracy Ferdinand Marcos in democracy. This leads to instability. China’s famine of 1958-1961 was the Philippines. < Democracy is all about political the worst recorded famine in world competition and power play. There history. Nearly three crore people is no scope for morality. died in this famine. During those read < So many people have to be days, India’s economic condition consulted in a democracy that it was not much better than China. Yet the leads to delays. India did not have a famine of the cartoon < Elected leaders do not know the kind China had. Economists think best interest of the people. It leads to bad decisions. < Democracy leads to corruption for it is based on electoral competition. < Ordinary people don’t know what is good for them; they should not decide anything. Are there some other arguments against democracy that you can think of? Which of these arguments applies mainly to democracy? Which of these can apply to misuse of any form of government? Which of these do you agree with? Clearly, democracy is not a magical solution for all the problems. It has not ended poverty in our country and in other parts of the world. Democracy as a form of government only ensures that 10 DEMOCRATIC POLITICS 2024-25 ©Osmani Simanca, Brazil, Cagle Cartoons Inc. 6 December 2004 that this was a result of different This is related to the third government policies in the two argument. Democracy provides a countries. The existence of method to deal with differences democracy in India made the and conflicts. In any society people Indian government respond to food are bound to have differences of scarcity in a way that the Chinese opinions and interests. These government did not. They point out differences are particularly sharp in that no large-scale famine has ever a country like ours which has an taken place in an independent and amazing social diversity. People democratic country. If China too had belong to different regions, speak multiparty elections, an opposition different languages, practise party and a press free to criticise the different religions and have different government, then so many people castes. They look at the world very may not have died in the famine. differently and have different This example brings out one of the preferences. The preferences of one reasons why democracy is considered group can clash with those of other the best form of government. groups. How do we resolve such a Democracy is better than any other conflict? The conflict can be solved form of government in responding to by brutal power. Whichever group the needs of the people. A non- is more powerful will dictate its democratic government may and can terms and others will have to accept respond to the people’s needs, but it that. But that would lead to all depends on the wishes of the resentment and unhappiness. people who rule. If the rulers don’t Different groups may not be able to want to, they don’t have to act live together for long in such a way. according to the wishes of the people. Democracy provides the only A democracy requires that the rulers peaceful solution to this problem. In have to attend to the needs of the democracy, no one is a permanent people. A democratic government is winner. No one is a permanent loser. a better government because it is a Different groups can live with one more accountable form of another peacefully. In a diverse government. country like India, democracy keeps There is another reason why our country together. democracy should lead to better These three arguments were about decisions than any non-democratic the effects of democracy on the government. Democracy is based on quality of government and social life. consultation and discussion. A But the strongest argument for democratic decision always involves democracy is not about what many persons, discussions and democracy does to the government. meetings. When a number of people It is about what democracy does to put their heads together, they are the citizens. Even if democracy does able to point out possible mistakes not bring about better decisions and What would have in any decision. This takes time. But accountable government, it is still happened if India there is a big advantage in taking better than other forms of was not a time over important decisions. This government. Democracy enhances democracy? reduces the chances of rash or the dignity of citizens. As we Could we have irresponsible decisions. Thus discussed above, democracy is stayed together as democracy improves the quality based on the principle of political a single nation? of decision-making. equality, on recognising that the WHAT IS DEMOCRACY? WHY DEMOCRACY? 11 2024-25 poorest and the least educated has the rulers have to change their the same status as the rich and the decisions, or the rulers can be educated. People are not subjects of changed. This cannot happen in a a ruler, they are the rulers non-democratic government. This cartoon was themselves. Even when they make Let us sum it up. Democracy published in Canada mistakes, they are responsible for cannot get us everything and is not just before its their conduct. the solution to all problems. But it parliamentary Finally, democracy is better than is clearly better than any other elections of 2004. other forms of government because alternative that we know. It offers Everyone, including it allows us to correct its own better chances of a good decision, the cartoonist, mistakes. As we saw above, there is it is likely to respect people’s own expected the Liberal no guarantee that mistakes cannot wishes and allows different kinds of par ty to win once be made in democracy. No form of people to live together. Even when again. When the government can guarantee that. The it fails to do some of these things, it results came, the advantage in a democracy is that allows a way of correcting its Liberal Party lost the such mistakes cannot be hidden for mistakes and offers more dignity to elections. Is this long. There is a space for public all citizens. That is why democracy cartoon an argument discussion on these mistakes. And is considered the best form of against democracy or there is a room for correction. Either government. for democracy? read the cartoon Rajesh and Muzaffar read an article. It showed that no democracy has ever gone to war with another democracy. Wars take place only when one of the two governments is non-democratic. The article said that this was a great merit of democracy. After reading the essay, Rajesh and Muzaffar had different reactions. Rajesh said that this was not a good argument for democracy. It was just a matter of chance. CHECK It is possible that in future democracies may have wars. Muzaffar said that it could not be a matter of YOUR chance. Democracies take decisions in such a way that it reduces the chances of war. Which of the two positions do you agree with and why? PROGRESS 12 DEMOCRATIC POLITICS 2024-25 ©Cam Cardow, The Ottawa Citizen, Canada, Cagle Cartoons Inc. 30 May 2004. This famous cartoon 1.4 BROADER MEANINGS OF DEMOCRACY by R K Laxman comments on the In this chapter we have considered through their elected representatives. celebrations of the the meaning of democracy in a This become necessary because: fifty years of limited and descriptive sense. We < Modern democracies involve such independence. How have understood democracy as a a large number of people that it is many images on the form of government. This way of physically impossible for them to wall do you recognize? defining democracy helps us to sit together and take a collective Do many common identify a clear set of minimal decision. people feel the way the features that a democracy must < Even if they could, the citizen does common man in this have. The most common form that not have the time, the desire or the cartoon does? democracy takes in our times is that skills to take part in all the of a representative democracy. You decisions. have already read about this in the This gives us a clear but minimal read previous classes. In the countries we understanding of democracy. This call democracy, all the people do not clarity helps us to distinguish the rule. A majority is allowed to take democracies from non-democracies. cartoon decisions on behalf of all the people. But it does not allow us to Even the majority does not rule distinguish between a democracy directly. The majority of people rule and a good democracy. It does not WHAT IS DEMOCRACY? WHY DEMOCRACY? 13 2024-25 ©R.K. Laxman, The Times of India allow us to see the operation of If we take these ideals seriously, democracy beyond government. For then no country in the world is a this we need to turn to broader democracy. Yet an understanding of meanings of democracy. democracy as an ideal reminds us Sometimes we use democracy for of why we value democracy. It organisations other than the enables us to judge an existing government. Just read these democracy and identify its In my village the statements: weaknesses. It helps us to Gram Sabha never < “We are a very democratic family. distinguish between a minimal meets. Is that Whenever a decision has to be taken, democracy and a good democracy. democratic? we all sit down and arrive at a In this book we do not deal much consensus. My opinion matters as much with this expanded notion of as my father’s.” democracy. Our focus here is with < “I don’t like teachers who do not allow some core institutional features of students to speak and ask questions in democracy as a form of government. the class. I would like to have teachers Next year you will read more about with democratic temperament.” a democratic society and ways of < “One leader and his family members evaluating our democracy. At this decide everything in this party. How can stage we just need to note that they talk of democracy?” democracy can apply to many These ways of using the word spheres of life and that democracy democracy go back to its basic can take many forms. There can be sense of a method of taking various ways of taking decisions in decisions. A democratic decision a democratic manner, as long as the involves consultation with and basic principle of consultation on an consent of all those who are affected equal basis is accepted. The most by that decision. Those who are not common form of democracy in powerful have the same say in today’s world is rule through taking the decision as those who are people’s elected representatives. We powerful. This can apply to a shall read more about that in government or a family or any other Chapter 3. But if the community is organisation. Thus democracy is small, there can be other ways of also a principle that can be applied taking democratic decisions. All the to any sphere of life. people can sit together and take Sometimes we use the word decisions directly. This is how democracy not to describe any Gram Sabha should work in a existing government but to set up village. Can you think of some other an ideal standard that all democratic ways of decision making? democracies must aim to become: < “True democracy will come to this A C T I V I T Y country only when no one goes hungry to bed.” < “In a democracy every citizen must be Find out the total number of eligible voters in your able to play equal role in decision assembly constituency and your parliamentary making. For this you don’t need just an constituency. Find out how many people can fit equal right to vote. Every citizen needs into the largest stadium in your area. Is it possible to have equal information, basic for all the voters in your parliamentary or assembly education, equal resources and a lot of constituency to sit together and have a meaningful commitment.” discussion? 14 DEMOCRATIC POLITICS 2024-25 This also means that no country the weakness of democracy: the fate is a perfect democracy. The features of the country depends not just on of democracy that we discussed in what the rulers do, but mainly on this chapter provide only the what we, as citizens, do. minimum conditions of a This is what distinguished democracy. That does not make it democracy from other governments. an ideal democracy. Every Other forms of government like democracy has to try to realise the monarchy, dictatorship or one-party ideals of a democratic decision- rule do not require all citizens to making. This cannot be achieved take part in politics. In fact most once and for all. This requires a non-democratic governments constant effort to save and would like citizens not to take part strengthen democratic forms of in politics. But democracy depends decision-making. What we do as on active political participation by citizens can make a difference to all the citizens. That is why a study making our country more or less of democracy must focus on democratic. This is the strength and democratic politics. exercises 1 Here is some information about four countries. Based on this information, how would you classify each of these countries. Write ‘democratic’, ‘undemocratic’ or ‘not sure’ against each of these. a Country A: People who do not accept the country’s official religion do not have a right to vote. b Country B: The same party has been winning elections for the last twenty years. c Country C: Ruling party has lost in the last three elections. d Country D: There is no independent election commission. 2 Here is some information about four countries. Based on this information, how would you classify each of these countries. Write ‘democratic’, ‘undemocratic’ or ‘not sure’ against each of these. a Country P: The parliament cannot pass a law about the army without the consent of the Chief of Army. b Country Q: The parliament cannot pass a law reducing the powers of the judiciary. c Country R: The country’s leaders cannot sign any treaty with another country without taking permission from its neighbouring country. d Country S: All the major economic decisions about the country are taken by officials of the central bank which the ministers cannot change. 3 Which of these is not a good argument in favour of democracy? Why? a People feel free and equal in a democracy. b Democracies resolve conflict in a better way than others. c Democratic government is more accountable to the people. d Democracies are more prosperous than others. WHAT IS DEMOCRACY? WHY DEMOCRACY? 15 2024-25 4 Each of these statements contains a democratic and an undemocratic element. Write out the two separately for each statement. a A minister said that some laws have to be passed by the parliament in order to conform to the regulations decided by the World Trade Organisation (WTO). b The Election Commission ordered re-polling in a constituency where large-scale rigging was reported. c Women’s representation in the parliament has barely reached 10 per cent. This led women’s organisations to demand one-third seats for women. 5 Which of these is not a valid reason for arguing that there is a lesser possibility of famine in a democratic country? a Opposition parties can draw attention to hunger and starvation. b Free press can report suffering from famine in different parts of the country. c Government fears its defeat in the next elections. d People are free to believe in and practise any religion. 6 There are 40 villages in a district where the government has made no provision for drinking water. These villagers met and considered many methods of forcing the government to respond to their need. Which of these is not a democratic method? a Filing a case in the courts claiming that water is part of right to life. b Boycotting the next elections to give a message to all parties. c Organising public meetings against government’s policies. d Paying money to government officials to get water. 7 Write a response to the following arguments against democracy: a Army is the most disciplined and corruption-free organisation in the country. Therefore army should rule the country. b Rule of the majority means the rule of ignorant people. What we need is the rule of the wise, even if they are in small numbers. c If we want religious leaders to guide us in spiritual matters, why not invite them to guide us in politics as well. The country should be ruled by religious leaders. 8 Are the following statements in keeping with democracy as a value? Why? a Father to daughter: I don’t want to hear your opinion about your marriage. In our family children marry where the parents tell them to. b Teacher to student: Don’t disturb my concentration by asking me questions in the classroom. c Employee to the officer: Our working hours must be reduced according to the law. 9 Consider the following facts about a country and decide if you would call it a democracy. Give reasons to support your decision. 16 DEMOCRATIC POLITICS 2024-25 exercises exercises a All the citizens of the country have right to vote. Elections are held regularly. b The country took loan from international agencies. One of the conditions for giving loan was that the government would reduce its expenses on education and health. c People speak more than seven languages but education is available only in one language, the language spoken by 52 percent people of that country. d Several organisations have given a call for peaceful demonstrations and nation wide strikes in the country to oppose these policies. Government has arrested these leaders. e The government owns the radio and television in the country. All the newspapers have to get permission from the government to publish any news about government’s policies and protests. 10 In 2004 a report published in USA pointed to the increasing inequalities in that country. Inequalities in income reflected in the participation of people in democracy. It also shaped their abilities to influence the decisions taken by the government. The report highlighted that: < If an average Black family earns $ 100 then the income of average White family is $ 162. A White family has twelve times more wealth than the average Black family. < In a President’s election ‘nearly 9 out of 10 individuals in families with income over $ 75,000 have voted. These people are the top 20% of the population in terms of their income. On the other hand only 5 people out of 10 from families with income less than $ 15,000 have voted. They are the bottom 20% of the population in terms of their income. < About 95% contribution to the political parties comes from the rich. This gives them opportunity to express their opinions and concerns, which is not available to most citizens.