SECTION I EVENTS AND PROCESSES In Section I, you will read about the French Revolution, the Russian Revolution, and the rise of Nazism. In different ways all these events were important in the making of the modern world. Chapter I is on the French Revolution. Today we often take the ideas of liberty, freedom and equality for granted. But we need to remind ourselves that these ideas also have a history. By looking at the French Revolution you will read a small part of that history. The French Revolution led to the end of monarchy in France. A society based on privileges gave way to a new system of governance. The Declaration of the Rights of Man during the revolution, announced the coming of a new time. The idea that all individuals had rights and could claim equality became part of a new language of politics. These notions of equality and freedom emerged as the central ideas of a new age; but in different countries they were reinterpreted and rethought in many different ways. The anti-colonial movements in India and China, Africa and South America, produced ideas that were innovative and original, but they spoke in a language that gained currency only from the late eighteenth century. In Chapter II, you will read about the coming of socialism in Europe, and the dramatic events that forced the ruling monarch, Tsar Nicholas II, to give up power. The Russian Revolution sought to change society in a different way. It raised the question of economic equality and the well-being of workers and peasants. The chapter will tell you about the changes that were initiated by the new Soviet government, the problems it faced and the measures it undertook. While Soviet Russia pushed ahead with industrialisation and mechanisation of agriculture, it denied the rights of citizens that were essential to the working of a democratic society. The ideals of socialism, 2024-25 1 EVENTS AND PROCESSES T h e    F r e n c h    R e v o l u t i o n however, became part of the anti-colonial movements in different countries. Today the Soviet Union has broken up and socialism is in crisis but through the twentieth century it has been a powerful force in the shaping of the contemporary world. Chapter III will take you to Germany. It will discuss the rise of Hitler and the politics of Nazism. You will read about the children and women in Nazi Germany, about schools and concentration camps. You will see how Nazism denied various minorities a right to live, how it drew upon a long tradition of anti-Jewish feelings to persecute the Jews, and how it waged a relentless battle against democracy and socialism. But the story of Nazism’s rise is not only about a few specific events, about massacres and killings. It is about the working of an elaborate and frightening system which operated at different levels. Some in India were impressed with the ideas of Hitler but most watched the rise of Nazism with horror. The history of the modern world is not simply a story of the unfolding of freedom and democracy. It has also been a story of violence and tyranny, death and destruction. 2 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World The French Revolution On the morning of 14 July 1789, the city of Paris was in a state of alarm. The king had commanded troops to move into the city. Rumours spread that he would soon order the army to open fire upon the citizens. Some 7,000 men and women gathered in front of the town hall and decided to form a peoples’ militia. They broke into a number of government buildings in search of arms. Finally, a group of several hundred people marched towards the eastern part of the city and stormed the fortress-prison, the Bastille, where they hoped to find hoarded ammunition. In the armed fight that followed, the commander of the Bastille was killed and the prisoners released – though there were only seven of them. Yet the Bastille was hated by all, because it stood for the despotic power of the king. The fortress was demolished and its stone fragments were sold in the markets to all those who wished to keep a souvenir of its destruction. The days that followed saw more rioting both in Paris and the countryside. Most people were protesting against the high price of bread. Much later, when historians looked back upon this time, they saw it as the beginning of a chain of events that ultimately led to the execution of the king in France, though most people at the time did not anticipate this outcome. How and why did this happen? Fig.1 – Storming of the Bastille. Soon after the demolition of the Bastille, artists made prints commemorating the event. 2024-25 3 T h T eh e      F r  e  n Fc h    r R  e ev o  l un t  i oc n h    R e v o l u t i o n Chapter I 1  French Society During the Late Eighteenth Century In 1774, Louis XVI of the Bourbon family of kings ascended the throne of France. He was 20 years old and married to the Austrian 1st estate princess Marie Antoinette. Upon his accession the new king found Clergy an empty treasury. Long years of war had drained the financial resources of France. Added to this was the cost of maintaining an extravagant court at the immense palace of Versailles. Under Louis 2nd estate XVI, France helped the thirteen American colonies to gain their Nobility independence from the common enemy, Britain. The war added more than a billion livres to a debt that had already risen to more than 2 billion livres. Lenders who gave the state credit, now began to charge 3rd estate 10 per cent interest on loans. So the French government was obliged Big businessmen, merchants, court to spend an increasing percentage of its budget on interest payments officials, lawyers etc. alone. To meet its regular expenses, such as the cost of maintaining an army, the court, running government offices or universities, the Peasants and artisans state was forced to increase taxes. Yet even this measure would not have sufficed. French society in the eighteenth century was divided Small peasants, landless labour, into three estates, and only members of the third estate paid taxes. servants The society of estates was part of the feudal system that dated back to the middle ages. The term Old Regime is usually used to describe the Fig.2 – A Society of Estates. society and institutions of France before 1789. Note that within the Third Estate some were rich and others poor. Fig. 2 shows how the system of  estates in French society was organised. Peasants made up about 90 per cent of the population. However, only a small number of them owned the land they cultivated. About 60 per cent of the land was owned by nobles, the Church and other richer members of the third estate. The members of the first two estates, that is, the clergy and the nobility, enjoyed certain privileges by birth. The most important of these was exemption from paying taxes to the state. The nobles further enjoyed feudal privileges. These included feudal dues, which they extracted from the peasants. Peasants were obliged New words to render services to the lord – to work in his house and fields – to serve in the army or to participate in building roads. Livre – Unit of currency in France, discontinued in 1794 The Church too extracted its share of taxes called tithes from the peasants, Clergy – Group of  persons invested with and finally, all members of  the third estate had to pay taxes to the state. special functions in the church These included a direct tax, called taille, and a number of indirect taxes Tithe – A tax levied by the church, comprising which were levied on articles of  everyday consumption like salt or tobacco. one-tenth of the agricultural produce The burden of financing activities of the state through taxes was borne Taille – Tax to be paid directly to the state by the third estate alone. 4 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World ‘This poor fellow brings everything, grain, fruits, money, salad. The fat lord sits there, ready to accept it all. He does not even care to grace him with a look.’ Activity Explain why the artist has portrayed the nobleman as the spider and the peasant as the fly. ‘The nobleman is the spider, ‘The more the devil has, the more he wants.’ the peasant the fly.’ Fig.3 – The Spider and the Fly. An anonymous etching. 1.1 The Struggle to Survive The population of France rose from about 23 million in 1715 to 28 million in 1789. This led to a rapid increase in the demand for foodgrains. Production of grains could not keep pace with the demand. So the price of bread which was the staple diet of the majority rose rapidly. Most workers were employed as labourers in workshops New words whose owner fixed their wages. But wages did not keep pace with the rise in prices. So the gap between the poor and the rich widened. Subsistence crisis – An extreme situation where Things became worse whenever drought or hail reduced the harvest. the basic means of livelihood are endangered This led to a subsistence crisis, something that occurred frequently Anonymous – One whose name remains unknown in France during the Old Regime. 2024-25 5 T h e    F r e n c h    R e v o l u t i o n 1.2 How a Subsistence Crisis Happens Bad The poorest can no harvest longer buy bread Disease epidemics Fig.4 – The course of a subsistence crisis. Activity Fill in the blank boxes in Fig. 4 with appropriate terms from among the following: 1.3 A Growing Middle Class Envisages an End to Privileges Food riots, scarcity of grain, increased In the past, peasants and workers had participated in revolts against number of deaths, rising food prices, increasing taxes and food scarcity. But they lacked the means and weaker bodies. programmes to carry out full-scale measures that would bring about a change in the social and economic order. This was left to those groups within the third estate who had become prosperous and had access to education and new ideas. The eighteenth century witnessed the emergence of social groups, termed the middle class, who earned their wealth through an expanding overseas trade and from the manufacture of goods such as woollen and silk textiles that were either exported or bought by the richer members of society. In addition to merchants and manufacturers, the third estate included professions such as lawyers or administrative officials. All of these were educated and believed that no group in society should be privileged by birth. Rather, a person’s social position must depend on his merit. These ideas envisaging a society based on freedom and equal laws and opportunities for all, were put forward by philosophers such as John Locke and Jean Jacques Rousseau. In his Two Treatises of  Government, Locke sought to refute the doctrine of the divine and absolute right 6 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World of the monarch. Rousseau carried the idea forward, proposing a form of government based on a social contract between people and their representatives. In The Spirit of the Laws, Montesquieu proposed a division of power within the government between the legislative, the executive and the judiciary. This model of government was put into force in the USA, after the thirteen colonies declared their independence from Britain. The American constitution and its guarantee of individual rights was an important example for political thinkers in France. The ideas of these philosophers were discussed intensively in salons and coffee-houses and spread among people through books and newspapers. These were frequently read aloud in groups for the benefit of those who could not read and write. The news that Louis XVI planned to impose further taxes to be able to meet the expenses of the state generated anger and protest against the system of privileges. Source A Accounts of lived experiences in the Old Regime 1. Georges Danton, who later became active in revolutionary politics, wrote to a friend in 1793, looking back upon the time when he had just completed his studies: ‘I was educated in the residential college of Plessis. There I was in the company of important men … Once my studies ended, I was left with nothing. I started looking for a post. It was impossible to find one at the law courts in Paris. The choice of a career in the army was not open to me as I was not a noble by birth, nor did I have a patron. The church too could not offer me a refuge. I could not buy an office as I did not possess a sou. My old friends turned their backs to me … the system had provided us with an education without however offering a field where our talents could be utilised.’ 2. An Englishman, Arthur Young, travelled through France during the years from 1787 to 1789 and wrote detailed descriptions of his journeys. He often commented on what he saw. ‘He who decides to be served and waited upon by slaves, ill-treated slaves at that, must be fully aware that by doing so he is placing his property and his life in a situation which is very different from that he would be in, had he chosen the services of free and welltreated men. And he who chooses to dine to the accompaniment of his victims’ groans, should not complain if during a riot his daughter gets kidnapped or his son’s throat is slit.’ Activity What message is Young trying to convey here? Whom does he mean when he speaks of‘ ‘slaves’? Who is he criticising? What dangers does he sense in the situation of 1787? 2024-25 7 Source T h e    F r e n c h    R e v o l u t i o n 2  The Outbreak of the Revolution Louis XVI had to increase taxes for reasons you have learnt in the previous section. How do you think he could have gone about doing Some important dates this? In France of the Old Regime the monarch did not have the 1774 Louis XVI becomes king of France, faces power to impose taxes according to his will alone. Rather he had to empty treasury and growing discontent call a meeting of the Estates General which would then pass his within society of the Old Regime. proposals for new taxes. The Estates General was a political body to 1789 Convocation of Estates General, Third which the three estates sent their representatives. However, the Estate forms National Assembly, the monarch alone could decide when to call a meeting of this body. The Bastille is stormed, peasant revolts in the countryside. last time it was done was in 1614. 1791 A constitution is framed to limit the powers On 5 May 1789, Louis XVI called together an assembly of the Estates of the king and to guarantee basic rights to General to pass proposals for new taxes. A resplendent hall in all human beings. Versailles was prepared to host the delegates. The first and second 1792-93 France becomes a republic, the king is estates sent 300 representatives each, who were seated in rows facing beheaded. each other on two sides, while the 600 members of the third estate Overthrow of the Jacobin republic, a Directory rules France. had to stand at the back. The third estate was represented by its more 1804 prosperous and educated members. Peasants, artisans and women Napoleon becomes emperor of France, were denied entry to the assembly. However, their grievances and annexes large parts of Europe. 1815 demands were listed in some 40,000 letters which the representatives Napoleon defeated at Waterloo. had brought with them. Voting in the Estates General in the past had been conducted according to the principle that each estate had one vote. This time too Louis XVI was determined to continue the same practice. But members of the third estate demanded that voting now be conducted by the assembly as a  whole, where each member would have one vote. This was one of the democratic principles put forward by philosophers like Rousseau in his book The Social Contract. When the king rejected this proposal, members of the third estate walked out of the assembly in protest. Activity The representatives of the third estate viewed themselves as spokesmen Representatives of the Third Estate take the for the whole French nation. On 20 June they assembled in the hall oath raising their arms in the direction of of an indoor tennis court in the grounds of Versailles. They declared Bailly, the President of the Assembly, themselves a National Assembly and swore not to disperse till they standing on a table in the centre. Do you had drafted a constitution for France that would limit the powers of think that during the actual event Bailly the monarch. They were led by Mirabeau and Abbé Sieyès. Mirabeau would  have stood with his back to the was born in a noble family but was convinced of the need to do away assembled deputies? What could have with a society of feudal privilege. He brought out a journal and been David’s intention in placing Bailly delivered powerful speeches to the crowds assembled at Versailles. (Fig.5) the way he has done? 8 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World Fig.5 – The Tennis Court Oath. Preparatory sketch for a large painting by Jacques-Louis David. The painting was intended to be hung in the National Assembly. Abbé Sieyès, originally a priest, wrote an influential pamphlet called ‘What is the Third Estate’? While the National Assembly was busy at Versailles drafting a constitution, the rest of France seethed with turmoil. A severe winter had meant a bad harvest; the price of bread rose, often bakers exploited the situation and hoarded supplies. After spending hours in long queues at the bakery, crowds of angry women stormed into the shops. At the same time, the king ordered troops to move into Paris. On 14 July, the agitated crowd stormed and destroyed the Bastille. In the countryside rumours spread from village to village that the lords of the manor had hired bands of brigands who were on their way to destroy the ripe crops. Caught in a frenzy of fear, peasants in several districts seized hoes and pitchforks and attacked chateaux. They looted hoarded grain and burnt down documents containing Regions not affected by the Great Fear Areas of agrarian revolt early 1789 Epicentres of main panic movements records of manorial dues. A large number of nobles fled from their The spread of the Great Fear homes, many of them migrating to neighbouring countries. Fig.6 – The spread of the Great Fear. Faced with the power of his revolting subjects, Louis XVI finally The map shows how bands of peasants spread from one point to another. accorded recognition to the National Assembly and accepted the principle that his powers would from now on be checked by a New words constitution. On the night of 4 August 1789, the Assembly passed a decree abolishing the feudal system of obligations and taxes. Members Chateau (pl. chateaux)  – Castle or stately of the clergy too were forced to give up their privileges. Tithes were residence belonging to a king or a nobleman abolished and lands owned by the Church were confiscated. As a Manor – An estate consisting of the lord’s result, the government acquired assets worth at least 2 billion livres. lands and his mansion 2024-25 9 T h e    F r e n c h    R e v o l u t i o n 2.1 France Becomes a Constitutional Monarchy The National Assembly completed the draft of the constitution in 1791. Its main object was to limit the powers of the monarch. These powers instead of being concentrated in the hands of one person, were now separated and assigned to different institutions – the legislature, executive and judiciary. This made France a constitutional monarchy. Fig. 7 explains how the new political system worked. Judiciary Executive Legislature CONTROL Judge King National Assembly (745 members) VETO VOTE CONTROL Ministers Electors (50,000 men) V O T E VOTE Active citizens: entitled to vote. About 4 million of a population of 28 million Passive citizens: no voting rights. About 3 million men Women, children and youth below 25. Fig.7 – The Political sytstem under the Constitution of 1791. The Constitution of 1791 vested the power to make laws in the National Assembly, which was indirectly elected. That is, citizens voted for a group of electors, who in turn chose the Assembly. Not all citizens, however, had the right to vote. Only men above 25 years of age who paid taxes equal to at least 3 days of a labourer’s wage were given the status of active citizens, that is, they were entitled to vote. The remaining men and all women were classed as passive citizens. To qualify as an elector and then as a member of the Assembly, a man had to belong to the highest bracket of taxpayers. 10 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World Fig.8 – The Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen, painted by the artist Le Barbier in 1790. The figure on the right represents France. The figure on the left symbolises the law. Source C The Declaration of Rights of Man and Citizen 1. Men are born and remain free and  equal in rights. 2. The aim of every political association is the preservation of the natural and inalienable rights of man; these are liberty, property, securi ty and resistance to oppression. 3. The source of all sovereignty resides in the nation; no group or individual may The Constitution began with a Declaration of the Rights of Man exercise authority that does not come and Citizen. Rights such as the right to life, freedom of speech, from the people. freedom of opinion, equality before law, were established as ‘natural 4. Liberty consists of the power to do and inalienable’ rights, that is, they belonged to each human being whatever is not injurious to others. by birth and could not be taken away. It was the duty of the state to 5. The law has the right to forbid only actions that are injurious to society. protect each citizen’s natural rights. 6. Law is the expression of the general will. All citizens have the right to participate in its formation, personally or through their representatives. All citizens are equal before it. Source B 7. No man may be accused, arrested or detained, except in cases determined by The revolutionary journalist Jean-Paul the law. Marat commented in his newspaper 11. Every citizen may speak, write and print L’Ami du peuple (The friend of the freely; he must take responsibility for the people) on the Constitution drafted by abuse of such liberty in cases determined the National Assembly: by the law. ‘The task of representing the people 12. For the maintenance of the public has been given to the rich … the lot of force and for the expenses of the poor and oppressed will never be administration a common tax is improved by peaceful means alone. Here indispensable; it must be assessed equally we have absolute proof of how wealth on all citizens in proportion to their means. influences the law.  Yet laws will last only as long as the people 17. Since property is a sacred and inviolable agree to obey them. And when they have managed to cast off right, no one may be deprived of it, unless the yoke of the aristocrats, they will do the same to the other a legally established public necessity owners of wealth.’ requires it. In that case a just Source: An extract from the newspaper L’Ami du peuple. compensation must be given in advance. 2024-25 11 T h e    F r e n c h    R e v o l u t i o n Box 1 Reading political symbols The majority of men and women in the eighteenth century could not read or write. So images and symbols were frequently used instead of printed words to communicate important ideas. The painting by Le Barbier (Fig. 8) uses many such symbols to convey the content of the Declaration of Rights. Let us try to read these symbols. The broken chain: Chains were used to fetter slaves. A broken chain stands for the act of becoming free. The bundle of rods or fasces: One rod can be easily broken, but not an entire bundle. Strength lies in unity. The eye within a triangle radiating light: The allseeing eye stands for knowledge. The rays of the sun will drive away the clouds of ignorance. Sceptre: Symbol of royal power. Snake biting its tail to form a ring: Symbol of Eternity. A ring has neither beginning nor end. 12 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World Red Phrygian cap: Cap worn by a slave upon becoming free. Blue-white-red: The national colours of France. Activity 1. Identify the symbols in Box 1 which stand for liberty, equality and fraternity. 2. Explain the meaning of the painting of the Declaration of Rights of Man and Citizen (Fig. 8) by reading only the symbols. 3. Compare the political rights which the Constitution of 1791 gave to the citizens with Articles 1 and 6 of the Declaration (Source C). Are the two documents consistent? Do the two documents convey The winged woman: the same idea? Personification of the law. 4. Which groups of French society would have gained from the Constitution of 1791? Which groups would have had reason to The Law Tablet: The law is the same for all, be dissatisfied? What developments does and all are equal before it. Marat  (Source B) anticipate in the future? 5. Imagine the impact of the events in France on neighbouring countries such as Prussia, Austria-Hungary or Spain, all of which were absolute monarchies. How would the kings, traders, peasants, nobles or members of the clergy here have reacted to the news of what was happening in France? 2024-25 13 T h e    F r e n c h    R e v o l u t i o n 3 France Abolishes Monarchy and Becomes a Republic The situation in France continued to be tense during the following years. Although Louis XVI had signed the Constitution, he entered into secret negotiations with the King of Prussia. Rulers of other neighbouring countries too were worried by the developments in France and made plans to send troops to put down the events that had been taking place there since the summer of 1789. Before this could happen, the National Assembly voted in April 1792 to declare war against Prussia and Austria. Thousands of  volunteers thronged from the provinces to join the army. They saw this as a war of the people against kings and aristocracies all over Europe. Among the patriotic songs they sang was the Marseillaise, composed by the poet Roget de L’Isle. It was sung for the first time by volunteers from Marseilles as they marched into Paris and so got its name. The Marseillaise is now the national anthem of France. The revolutionary wars brought losses and economic difficulties to the people. While the men were away fighting at the front, women were left to cope with the tasks of earning a living and looking after their families. Large sections of the population were convinced that the revolution had to be carried further, as the Constitution of 1791 gave political rights only to the richer sections of society. Political clubs became an important rallying point for people who wished to discuss government policies and plan their own forms of action. The most successful of these clubs was that of the Jacobins, which got its name from the former convent of St Jacob in Paris. Women too, who had been active throughout this period, formed their own clubs. Section 4 of this chapter will tell you more about their activities and demands. The members of the Jacobin club belonged mainly to the less prosperous sections of society. They included small shopkeepers, artisans such as shoemakers, pastry cooks, watch-makers, printers, as well as servants and daily-wage workers. Their leader was Maximilian Robespierre. A large group among the Jacobins decided to start wearing long striped trousers similar to those worn by dock workers. This was to set themselves apart from the fashionable sections of society, especially nobles, who wore knee breeches. It New words Convent – Building belonging to a community devoted to a religious life Fig.9 – A sans-culottes couple. 14 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World Fig.10 – Nanine Vallain, Liberty. This is one of the rare paintings by a woman artist. The revolutionary events made it possible for women to train with established painters and to exhibit their works in the Salon, which was an exhibition held every two years. The painting is a female allegory of liberty – that is, the female form symbolises the idea of freedom. Activity Look carefully at the painting and identify the objects which are political symbols you saw in Box 1 (broken chain, red cap, fasces, Charter of the Declaration of Rights). The pyramid stands for equality, often represented by a triangle. Use the symbols to interpret the painting. Describe your impressions of the female figure of liberty. was a way of proclaiming the end of the power wielded by the wearers of knee breeches. These Jacobins came to be known as the sans-culottes, literally meaning ‘those without knee breeches’. Sansculottes men wore in addition the red cap that symbolised liberty. Women however were not allowed to do so. In the summer of 1792 the Jacobins planned an insurrection of a large number of Parisians who were angered by the short supplies and high prices of food. On the morning of August 10 they stormed the Palace of the Tuileries, massacred the king’s guards and held the king himself as hostage for several hours. Later the Assembly voted to imprison the royal family. Elections were held. From now on all men of 21 years and above, regardless of wealth, got the right to vote. The newly elected assembly was called the Convention. On 21 September 1792 it abolished the monarchy and declared France a republic. As you know, a republic is a form of government where the people elect the government including the head of the 2024-25 15 T h e    F r e n c h    R e v o l u t i o n government. There is no hereditary monarchy. You can try and New words find out about some other countries that are republics and investigate when and how they became so. Treason – Betrayal of  one’s country or government Louis XVI was sentenced to death by a court on the charge of treason. On 21 January 1793 he was executed publicly at the Place de la Concorde. The queen Marie Antoinette met with the same fate shortly after. 3.1 The Reign of Terror The period from 1793 to 1794 is referred to as the Reign of Terror. Robespierre followed a policy of severe control and punishment. All those whom he saw as being ‘enemies’ of the Source D republic – ex-nobles and clergy, members of other political parties, even members of his own party who did not agree with What is liberty? Two conflicting views: his methods – were arrested, imprisoned and then tried by a The revolutionary journalist Camil le revolutionary tribunal. If the court found them ‘guilty’ they Desmoulins wrote the following in 1793. He was executed shortly after, during the Reign were guillotined. The guillotine is a device consisting of two of Terror. poles and a blade with which a person is beheaded. It was named ‘Some people believe that Liberty is like a after Dr Guillotin who invented it. child, which needs to go through a phase of being disciplined before it attains maturity. Robespierre’s government issued laws placing a maximum ceiling Quite the opposite. Liberty is Happiness, on wages and prices. Meat and bread were rationed. Peasants Reason, Equality, Justice, it is the Declaration were forced to transport their grain to the cities and sell it at of Rights … You would like to finish off all your enemies by guillotining them. Has prices fixed by the government. The use of more expensive white anyone heard of something more senseless? flour was forbidden; all citizens were required to eat the pain Would it be possible to bring a single person d’égalité (equality bread), a loaf made of wholewheat. Equality to the scaffold without making ten more was also sought to be practised through forms of speech and enemies among his relations and friends?’ address. Instead of the traditional Monsieur (Sir) and Madame On 7 February 1794, (Madam) all French men and women were henceforth Citoyen Robespierre made a and Citoyenne (Citizen). Churches were shut down and their speech at the Convention, which was buildings converted into barracks or offices. then carried by the newspaper Le  Moniteur Robespierre pursued his policies so relentlessly that even his Universel. Here is an supporters began to demand moderation. Finally, he was extract from it: convicted by a court in July 1794, arrested and on the next day ‘To establish and consolidate democracy, to sent to the guillotine. achieve the peaceful rule of constitutional laws, we must first finish the war of liberty Activity against tyranny …. We must annihilate the enemies of the republic at home and abroad, or else we shall perish. In time of Revolution Compare the views of Desmoulins and Robespierre. How does a democratic government may rely on terror. each one understand the use of state force? What does Terror is nothing but justice, swift, severe Robespierre mean by ‘the war of liberty against tyranny’? How and inflexible; … and is used to meet the does Desmoulins perceive liberty? Refer once more to Source C. most urgent needs of the fatherland. To curb the enemies of Liberty through terror is the What did the constitutional laws on the rights of individuals lay right of the founder of the Republic.’ down? Discuss your views on the subject in class. 16 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World Fig.11 – The revolutionary government sought to mobilise the loyalty of its subjects through various means – one of them was the staging of festivals like this one. Symbols from civilisations of ancient Greece and Rome were used to convey the aura of a hallowed history. The pavilion on the raised platform in the middle carried by classical columns was made of perishable material that could be dismantled. Describe the groups of people, their clothes, their roles and actions. What impression of a revolutionary festival does this image convey? 3.2 A Directory Rules France The fall of the Jacobin government allowed the wealthier middle classes to seize power. A new constitution was introduced which denied the vote to non-propertied sections of society. It provided for two elected legislative councils. These then appointed a Directory, an executive made up of five members. This was meant as a safeguard against the concentration of power in a one-man executive as under the Jacobins. However, the Directors often clashed with the legislative councils, who then sought to dismiss them. The political instability of the Directory paved the way for the rise of a military dictator, Napoleon Bonaparte. Through all these changes in the form of government, the ideals of freedom, of equality before the law and of fraternity remained inspiring ideals that motivated political movements in France and the rest of Europe during the following century.