chapter 11 Consumer ProteCtion Banks resPonsiBle for failed transaCtions and no Cash in atms In a landmark consumer forum judgement, Learning Objectives now, if you do not get money from ATMs, it would be considered as deficiency of services After studying this  on part of bank,.On May 4, 2017, a petition in the Consumer Forum in Raipur was filed where chapter, you should be the complainant submitted photos and video able to: recording of three failed ATM transactions due to non-availability of cash bank’s ATMs. ¾ state the importance of In front of the forum, the bank argued that ATM runs with Internet connectivity, so consumer protection; at the time when users use ATM, he/she is not directly the bank client. Hence, if the said money not withdrawn from the ATM, then it ¾ briefly explain legal cannot be termed as a deficiency in service. framework for consumer The forum rejected the bank’s logic protection in India; completely. The petitioner has presented photo and video recording at the time of withdrawal as evidence in front of forum. ¾ descr ibe consumer Forum acknowledged that the consumers at rights in India; various times go to ATM to withdrawn money every time the message of ‘cash not available’ is the lack in service. ¾ briefly describe the ways The forum accepted the petition. After and means of consumer hearing the arguments of both the parties, the protection; and forum ordered that if the bank will not provide ATM service to the customer, then it will be considered a reduction in service Consumer Forum imposed a fine of Rs. 2,500 on the bank including Rs1,500 as compensation for mental harassment and Rs1,000 for legal expenses for non-availability of cash in its ATMs as deficiency in bank services. Source:http://dailypost.in/news/ consumer-forum-fines-sbi-ignoring- customers/, 2017. 2024-25 Ch_11.indd   289 2/22/2024   12:12:55 PM BUSINESS  STUDIES 290 IntroductIon cheated and is exposed to many risks and health problems. Each one of us is a consumer in one way or another. It is important for us Can business afford to ignore the to be an aware and informed consumer interests of consumers? The market of goods and services available to us in forces have changed from a seller the market.The above case is just one market i.e., the earlier approach of of the examples of the many problems caveat emptor which means Let the that consumers face in the purchase, buyer beware, to a consumer market use and consumption of goods and i.e., caveat venditor which implies services. But, very few consumers Let the seller beware. A consumer are aware of their rights given to is said to be a KING in the free them by the Consumer Protection market economy. Hence, consumer Act 2019. The Consumer Protection protection has significance for both Act 20192019 has replaced the Act consumers and business alike. Under 1986 and seeks to widen its scope in the Consumer Protection Act 2019, the addressing consumer concerns. Government of India has conferred a Have you ever thought what legal protection to safeguard interests would be the plight of consumers if of a consumer. adequate protection is not provided to them? With growing competition Importance of consumer protectIon and in an attempt to increase The concept of consumer protection their sales and market share, is to safeguard the interests of the manufacturers, sellers and service- consumers. It adopts measures to providers may be tempted to engage in unscrupulous, exploitative and protect consumers from unethical unfair trade practices like defective malpractices by businesses and and unsafe products, adulteration, provide a swift redressal of their false and misleading advertising, grievances with regard to: hoarding, black-marketing, etc. 1. Sale of adulterated goods such as This means that a consumer might adding inferior substances to the be exposed to risks due to unsafe product being sold. products, might suffer from bad 2. Sale of counterfeit goods such as health due to adulterated food selling a product of lesser value products, might be cheated because than the real product. of misleading advertisements or sale of spurious products, might have 3. Sale of sub-standard goods such to pay a higher price when sellers as the sale of products that do engage in overpricing, hoarding or not meet the prescribed quality black-marketing, etc. As a result, standards. consumer becomes unsafe, feels 4. Sale of duplicate goods. 2024-25 Ch_11.indd   290 10-08-2022   10:03:34 cONSUMER pROTEcTION 291 5. Use of malfunctioning weights and from various types of exploitation and measures that lead to underweight should complain about it. Consumer of products. protection has a wide scope. It not only 6. Black marketing and hoarding that includes educating consumers about eventually leads to scarcity of the their rights and responsibilities, but product and well as a rise in the also helps in getting their grievances price of the same. redressed. It not only requires a judicial 7. Overcharging a product, i.e., machinery for protecting the interests charging a product above its of consumers but also requires the Maximum Retail Price. consumers to be united and form themselves into consumer associations 8. Supplying of defective goods. for protection and promotion of their 9. Advertisements that are interests. misleading, i.e., advertisements that falsely claim a product or a From consumers’ point of view service to be shown as superior The importance of consumer protection quality, grade or standard when from the consumers’ point of view can not in real. be understood from the following 10. Supply of inferior services, i.e., points: quality of service lesser than the  (i) Consumer Ignorance: In the condition agreed. light of widespread ignorance of consumers about their rights need for consumer Protection and reliefs available to them, it The need for consumer protection arises becomes necessary to educate from the need to protect consumers from them about the same so as to the loss or injury or other prevailing achieve consumer awareness. malpractices and to ensure:  (ii) Unorganised Consumers: 1. Physical safety of a consumer. Consumers need to be organised 2. Access to information. in the form of  consumer 3. Corporate Social Responsibility organisations which would to provide quality and quantity of take care of their interests. goods at fair prices. Though, in India, we do have 4. Consumer satisfaction. consumer organisations which are working in this direction, 5. Social justice and  Trusteeship adequate protection is required 6. Survival and the Growth of to be given to consumers till businesses. these organisations become powerful enough to protect That is why we as an informed consumer and promote the interests of have to wake up and save our self consumers. 2024-25 Ch_11.indd   291 10-08-2022   10:03:34 BUSINESS  STUDIES 292 Compensation for impurities in cold drinks (iii) Widespread Exploitation of important because of the following Consumers: Consumers might reasons: be exploited by unscrupulous,  (i) L o n g - t e rm  I n t e r e s t  o f exploitative and unfair trade B u s i n e s s :  E n l i g h t e n e d practices like defective and businesses realise that it is unsafe products, adulteration, in their long-term interest to false and misleading advertising, satisfy their customers. Satisfied hoarding, black-marketing, etc. customers not only lead to Consumers need protection repeat sales but also provide against such malpractices of the good feedback to prospective sellers. customers and thus, help in increasing the customer-base of From the point of view of Business business. Thus, business firms A business must also lay emphasis should aim at long-term profit on protecting the consumers and maximisation through customer adequately satisfying them. This is satisfaction. 2024-25 Ch_11.indd   292 2/22/2024   12:14:01 PM cONSUMER pROTEcTION 293 (ii) Business uses Society’s it is advisable that business R e s o u r c e s :  B u s i n e s s organisations voluntarily resort organisations use resources to such practices where the which belong to the society. customers’ needs and interests They, thus, have a responsibility will well be taken care of. to supply such products and render such services which are the consumer protectIon act, 2019 in public interest and would The Consumer protection Act 2019 not impair public confidence in seeks to protect and promote the them. consumers’ interest through speedy (iii) Social Responsibility:  A and inexpensive redressal of their b u s i n e s s  h a s  s o c i a l grievances. It extends to the whole of responsibilities towards various India. It is applicable to all types of interest groups. Business businesses whether a manufacturer organisations make money by or a trader and whether supplying selling goods and providing goods or providing servicesincluding services to consumers. Thus, e-commerce firms. The Act confers consumers form an important certain rights to consumers with a view group among the many stake- to empowering them and to protect holders of business and like their interests. other stakeholders, their interest has to be well taken care of. Who Is a consumer? (iv) Moral Justification: It is the A ‘consumer’ is generally understood moral duty of any business to as a person who uses or consumes take care of consumer’s interest goods or avails of any service. Under and avoid any form of their the Consumer Protection Act 2019, exploitation. Thus, a business a consumer is a person who buys must avoid unscrupulous, any goods or avails services for a exploitative and unfair trade consideration, which has been paid practices like defective and or promised, or partly paid and partly unsafe products, adulteration, promised, or under any scheme of false and misleading advertising, deferred payment. It includes any hoarding, black marketing, etc. user of such goods or beneficiary of (v) Government Intervention: A services if such use is made with the business engaging in any form approval of the buyer. It applies to of exploitative trade practices both offline and online transactions would inv i te  government through electronic means or by intervention or action. This teleshopping or direct selling or can impair and tarnish the multilevel marketing. However, any image of the company. Thus, person who obtains goods or avails 2024-25 Ch_11.indd   293 10-08-2022   10:03:34 BUSINESS  STUDIES 294 Protection against malpractices and exploitation services for resale or commercial consumer rIghts purpose is nottreated as a consumer and is outside the scope of Consumer The Consumer Protection Act 2019 Protection Act 2019. provides for six rights of consumers. Terms & Definitions 1. Complaint: Any allegation in writing made by the complainant for obtaining relief w.r.t restrictive trade practice, defect in goods or deficiency in services provided, overcharging of price or offer of goods or service injurious to life and safety. 2. Complainant: means one or more consumers, or any voluntary consumer association, central or state government or the central authority or a legal heir or legal representative or a parent or legal representative in case of a minor. 3. Spurious goods: Goods that are falsely claimed to be genuine. 4. Unfair trade practice: A trade practice for the purpose of promoting sale, use or supply of any goods or service falsely represents its quality, standard, quantity, composition, style or model. 2024-25 Ch_11.indd   294 10-08-2022   10:03:34 cONSUMER pROTEcTION 295 5. Restrictive trade practice: A trade practice which manipulates price or affect the flow of supplies in the market relating to goods and services in such a manner that an unjustified cost is imposed on the consumer. 6. Defect: Any fault, imperfection, shortcoming or inadequacy in quality, nature and manner of performance in relation to goods or a product. 7. Deficiency: Any fault, imperfection, shortcoming or inadequacy in quality, nature and manner of performance in relation to in relation to any service and includes act of negligence or omission or commission or withholding relevant information which causes loss or injury to the consumer. 8. Injury: Any harm illegally caused to any person in body, mind or property. 9. Product: Any article or goods or substance or raw material or any extended cycle of such product either in gaseous , liquid or solid state possessing intrinsic value capable of delivery either as assembled or a component produced or manufactured to trade. It does not include human tissues, blood, blood products and organs. 10. Product Seller: Any person in the course of business imports, sells, distributes, leases, installs, prepares, labels, markets, repairs, maintains or otherwise involved in placing the product for commercial use or a service provider. 11. Product Liability: Responsibility of a product manufacturer or seller of any product or service to compensate for any harm caused to a consumer by defective product manufactured or sold or by deficiency in services. These rights include the following: complete information about 1. Right to Safety: The consumer the product he intends to buy has a right to be protected including its ingredients, date against goods and services which of manufacture, price, quantity, are hazardous to life, health directions for use, etc. It is and property. For example, because of this reason that the electrical appliances which are legal framework in India requires manufactured with substandard the manufactures to provide such products or do not conform to information on the package and the safety norms might cause label of the product. serious injury. Thus, consumers  3. Right to be assured:  The are educated that they should consumer has the freedom to use electrical appliances which access variety of products at are ISI marked as this would be competitive prices. This implies an assurance of such products that the marketers should offer a meeting quality specifications. wide variety of products in terms of quality, brand, prices, size, etc. 2. Right to be informed: The and allow the consumer to make consumer has a right to have a choice from amongst these. 2024-25 Ch_11.indd   295 10-08-2022   10:03:34 BUSINESS  STUDIES 296 4. Right to be heard: The consumer consumer responsIbIlItIes has a right to file a complaint and to be heard in case of The Consumer Protect ion Act dissatisfaction with a good or empowers the consumer to fight a service. It is because of this against any unscrupulous, exploitative reason that many enlightened and unfair, restrictive trade practices business firms have set up adopted by sellers. Consumer rights, their own consumer service and by themselves, cannot be effective in grievance cells. Many consumer achieving the objective of consumer organisations are also working protection. Consumer protection can, towards this direction and helping in effect, be achieved only when the consumers in redressal of their consumers also understand their responsibilities. grievances. 5. Right to seek redressal: A consumer should keep in mind The the following responsibilities while consumer has a right to get relief purchasing, using and consuming against unfair trade practice goods and services — of restrictive trade practices or unscrupulous exploitation in  (i) Be aware about various goods case the product or a service and services available in the falls short of his expectations. market so that an intelligent and The Consumer Protection Act wise choice can be made. 2019 provides for redressal to the  (ii) Buy only standardised goods as consumers including replacement they provide quality assurance. of the product, removal of defect Thus, look for ISI mark on in the product, compensation paid electrical goods, FPO mark on for any loss or injury suffered by food products, Hallmark on the consumer, etc. jewelry, etc. 6. Right to Consumer Education:  (iii) Learn about the risks associated The consumer has a right to with products and services, follow acquire knowledge and to be manufacturer’s instructions and a wel l  informed consumer use the products safely. throughout life. He should be  (iv) Read labels carefully so as to aware about his rights and the have information about prices, reliefs available to him in case net weight, manufacturing and of a product or service falling expiry dates, etc. short of his expectations. Many  (v) Assert yourself to ensure that consumer organisations and you get a fair deal. some enlightened businesses are  (vi) Be honest in your dealings. taking an active part in educating Choose only from legal goods consumers in this respect. and services and discourage 2024-25 Ch_11.indd   296 10-08-2022   10:03:34 cONSUMER pROTEcTION 297 unscrupulous practices like Ways and means of consumer black-marketing, hoarding, etc. protectIon (vii) Ask for a cash memo on purchase of goods or services. This would A consumers’ awareness about their serve as a proof of the purchase rights and responsibilities is just one made. of the ways in which the objective of consumer protection can be achieved. (viii) File a complaint in an appropriate There are other ways in which this consumer forum in case of a objective may be achieved. shortcoming in the quality of goods purchased or services  1. Self-regulation by Business: availed. Do not fail to take an Socially responsible firms follow action even when the amount ethical standards and practices in involved is small. dealing with their customers Good and ethical practices encourage (ix) Form consumer societies which firms to realise that it is in their would play an active part in long-term interest to serve the educating consumers and customers in a rightful manner. safeguarding their interests. Many firms have set up their (x) Respect the environment. Avoid customer service and grievance waste, littering and contributing cells to redress the problems and to pollution. grievances of their consumers. 2024-25 Ch_11.indd   297 10-08-2022   10:03:35 BUSINESS  STUDIES 298 2. Business Associations: The of his responsibilities would also associations of trade, commerce enable a consumer to safeguard and business like Federation of his interests. In this regard, the Indian Chambers of Commerce of Department of Consumer Affairs, India (FICCI) and Confederation of GOI, has been undertaking Indian Industries (CII) have laid JagoGrahakJagocampaign, for down their code of conduct which generating awareness among lay down for their members the consumers. guidelines in their dealings with  4. Consumer Organisations: the customers. Consumer organisations play 3. Consumer  Awareness :  A an important role in educating consumer, who is well-informed consumers about their rights and about his rights and the reliefs providing protection to them. These available to him, would be in a organisations can force business position to raise his voice against firms to avoid malpractices and any unfair trade practices or exploitation of consumers. unscrupulous exploitation. In  5. Government: The government addition to this, an understanding can protect the interests of the Mark of Bureau of Indian Standards Food process Order Agmark BIS Hallmark Eco-mark Marks indicating quality in different products 2024-25 Ch_11.indd   298 10-08-2022   10:03:35 cONSUMER pROTEcTION 299 consumers by enacting various machinery at the district, state measures. For example, the GOI and national levels for redressal has set up a toll-free national of consumer grievances. consumer Helpline Number 1800114000 for this purpose. redressal agencIes under the The legal framework in India consumer protectIon act encompasses various legislations which provide protection to For the redressal of consumer consumers. The most important of grievances, the Consumer Protection these regulations is the Consumer Act 2019 provides for setting up of a Protection Act, 2019. The Act three-tier enforcement machinery at provides for a central authority the District, State, and the National to regulate matters relating to levels, known as the District Consumer violation of rights of consumers, Disputes Redressal Commission, unfair trade practices and false or State Consumer Disputes Redressal misleading advertisements which Commission, and the National are prejudicial to the interests Consumer Disputes Redressal of consumers.  This is known Commission. They are briefly referred as Central Consumer Protection to as the ‘District Commission’, ‘State Authority (CCPA). A three-tier Commission’, and the ‘National Consumer Awareness 2024-25 Ch_11.indd   299 10-08-2022   10:03:35 BUSINESS  STUDIES 300 Commission’, respectively. While the evidence brought to its notice National Commission is set up by by the complainant and can ask the Central Government, the State for any required information Commissions and the District Forums document or records from the are set up, by the State Government. service provider for settlement. The Figure on redressal agencies If any of the parties are shows the hierarchical structure of not satisfied by the order of this three-tire machinery. District Commission can appeal Let us now see how the consumer against such order to the State grievances are redressed by the three- Commission on the grounds of tire machinery: facts or law within a period of forty 1. District Commission:District five days from the date of order. commission has a jurisdiction  2. S ta te  Commiss ion :  I t  i s to entertain complaints where established by the respective value of goods or services paid state government and ordinarily as consideration does not exceed function at the state capital. State one crore rupees. Either on the Commission has a jurisdiction first hearing or at any later stage, to entertain complaints where it appears to district commission value of goods and services paid that there exists elements of as consideration exceeds one se t t l ement  which  may  be crore but does not exceed ten acceptable to the parties, it may crore rupees. If any of the parties direct them to give their consent are not satisfied by the order of for settlement of dispute through State Commission can appeal mediation within five days. In case the parties agree for settlement against such order to the National by mediation and give written Commission within a period of consent, the district commission thirty days of such order. refers the matter for mediation  3. National Commission: The and the provisions relating to Nat iona l  Commiss ion  has mediation shall apply. However, in territorial jurisdiction over the event of failure of settlement the whole country. National by mediation proceeds with the Commission has a jurisdiction complaint. If the complaint alleges to entertain complaints where defect in goods which cannot value of goods or services paid as be determined without proper consideration exceeds ten crores analysis or test of goods, the of rupees. If any of the parties commission obtains the sample are not satisfied by the order of of goods, seal it and refer to the National Commission can appeal appropriate authority for analysis. against such order to the Supreme In case of services, the dispute Court of India within a period of is settled based on the basis of thirty days of such order. 2024-25 Ch_11.indd   300 10-08-2022   10:03:35 cONSUMER pROTEcTION 301 relief available  (x) Compensate for any loss or injury Where District or State or National suffered by consumer under Commission is satisfied about defect product liability action and in goods, or deficiency in services on withdraw hazardous products any unfair trade practice or claim for from being offered for sale etc. compensation under product liability, However, every order of a district issues an order: commission, the state commission or (i) To remove the defect in goods or the national commission is deemed deficiency in service. final if no appeal for such order is made by any of the parties involved (ii) To replace the defective product in dispute. with a new one, free from any defect. role of consumer Organisations (iii) To refund the price paid for the and ngos product, or the charges paid for I n  I n d i a ,  s e v e r a l  c o n s u m e r the service. organisations and non-governmental (iv) To pay a reasonable amount of organisations (NGOs) have been set compensation for any loss or up for the protection and promotion injury suffered by the consumer of  consumers ’  interests.  Nondue to the negligence of the governmental organisations are nonopposite party. profit organisations which aim at promoting the welfare of people. They (v) To pay punitive damages in have a constitution of their own and appropriate circumstances. are free from government interference. (vi) To discontinue the unfair/ Consumer organisations and NGOs restrictive trade practice and not perform several functions for the to repeat it in the future. protection and promotion of interest (vii) Not to offer hazardous goods for of consumers. These include: sale.  (i) Educating the general public (viii) To withdraw the hazardous about consumer rights by goods from sale. organising training programmes, (ix) To cease manufacture of seminars and workshops. hazardous goods and to desist  (ii) Publishing periodicals and from offering hazardous services. other publications to impart setting up of consumer Mediation cell The Chapter V of the Consumer Protection Act of 2019 provides for a mediation process for settlement of disputes at three levels - National, State and District with all three being attached to the respective commissions. It is a new provision in the Act 2019 as an alternate mechanism to ensure faster aspeedydispute settlements by respective commissions. 2024-25 Ch_11.indd   301 10-08-2022   10:03:35 BUSINESS  STUDIES 302 knowledge about consumer exploitative and unfair trade problems, legal reporting, reliefs practices of sellers. available and other matters of  (v) Providing legal assistance to interest. consumers by way of providing (iii) Carrying out comparative aid, legal advice etc. in seeking legal remedy. testing of consumer products (vi) Filing complaints in appropriate in accredited laboratories to test consumer courts on behalf of the relative qualities of competing consumers. brands and publishing the  (vii) Taking an initiative in filing test results for the benefit of cases in consumer courts in the consumers. interest of the general public, (iv) Encouraging consumers to not for any individual. strongly protest and take an  (viii) Consumer unity and Trust action against unscrupulous, Society (CuTS), Jaipur. Key terms Consumer protection Consumer Rights Consumer Responsibilities Redressal mechanism Mediation sUMMarY Importance of Consumer Protection: From the point of consumers, consumer protection is important because consumers are ignorant, unorganised and exploited by sellers. Consumer Protection is also important for a business because (i) It is in the long-term interest of business, (ii) Business uses society’s resources, (iii) It is a social responsibility of business, (iv)It has moral justification, (v) It avoids government intervention in the functioning of business. Legal Protection to Consumers: The Indian legal framework consists of a number of legislations which provide protection to consumers. These include (i) The Consumer protection Act, 1986, (ii) The Indian Contract Act, 1872, (iii) The Sale of Goods Act, 1930, (iv) The essential Commodities Act,1955, (v) The Agricultural produce (Grading and Marking) Act, 1937, (vi) The prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954, (vii) The Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1976, (viii) The Trade Marks Act, 1999, (ix) The Competition Act, 2002,(x) The Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986. Consumer Rights: The Consumer Protection Act, 1986, provides for six consumer rights. These are: (i) Right to safety, (ii) Right to be informed,  (iii) 2024-25 Ch_11.indd   302 10-08-2022   10:03:35 cONSUMER pROTEcTION 303 Right to choose, (iv) Right to be heard, (v) Right to seek redressal,(vi) Right to consumer education. Consumer Responsibilities: In addition to exercising his rights, a consumer should also keep in mind his responsibilities while purchasing, using and consuming goods and services. Ways and Means of Consumer Protection: There are various ways in which the objective of consumer protection can be achieved. These Include (i) Self regulation by business, (ii) Business associations, (iii) Consumer awareness, (iv)Consumer organisations, (v) Government. Redressal Agencies under the Consumer Protection Act: The Consumer Protection Act provides for setting up of a three-tier enforcement machinery at the District, State, and the National levels. They are referred to as the ‘District Forum’, ‘State Commission’, and the ‘National Commission’. There are various reliefs available to a consumer under the Act. The appropriate consumer court may pass an order for removal of defect in goods, replace a defective product, refund the price of the product, pay compensation for the loss suffered, etc. Consumer Organisations and NGOs: In India, several consumer organisations and non-governmental organisations (nGOs) are playing an active role in protection and promotion of consumers’ interests. eXercises very short answer type 1. Under which consumer right does a business firm set up consumer grievance cell? 2. Which quality certification mark is used for agricultural products? 3. What is the jurisdiction of cases that can be filed in a State Commission? 4. State any two relief available to consumers under CPA. 5. Name the component of product mix that helps the consumer to exercise the right to information. short answer type 1. Enumerate the various Acts passed by the Government of India which help in protection of consumers’ interests. 2. What are the responsibilities of a consumer? 3. Who can file a complaint in a consumer court? 2024-25 Ch_11.indd   303 10-08-2022   10:03:35 BUSINESS  STUDIES 304 4. FSSAI (Food Safety and Standards Authority of India) has made a proposal for hotels and other food outlets to declare the kind of oil/fat used in cooking each of the food items on their menus. Name and explain the Consumer Right being reinforced by this proposal. 5. Who is a consumer as per CPA? Long answer type 1. Explain the importance of consumer protection from the point of view of a business. 2. Explain the rights and responsibilities of consumer? 3. What are various ways in which the objective of consumer protection can be achieved? 4. Explain the redressal mechanism available to consumers under the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 5. Explain the role of consumer organisations and NGOs in protecting and promoting consumer’s interest. 6. Mrs. Mathur sent a jacket to a laundry shop in January 2018. The jacket was purchased at a price of `4,500. She had previously sent the jacket for dry cleaning with Shine Dry Cleaners and the jacket was cleaned well. However, she noticed that her jacket had white discoloration marks when she collected the jacket this time. On informing the dry cleaner, Mrs. Mathur received a letter confirming that discolouration indeed appeared after the jacket was dry cleaned. She contacted the dry cleaner multiple times and requested for compensation for discoloured jacket but to no avail. Upon Consumer court’s intervention, Shine Dry Cleaners agreed to compensate Rs. 2,500 to Mrs. Mathur for the discoloured jacket. (a) Which right was exercised by Mrs. Mathur at the first instance. (b) Name and explain the right which helped Mrs. Mathur to avail the compensation. (c) State which consumer responsibility has been fulfilled by Mrs. Mathur in the above case. (d) State any other two responsibilities to be assumed by the consumers. Project work 1. Visit a consumer organisation in your town. List down the various functions performed by it. 2. Collect some newspaper cuttings of some consumer cases and the rulings given therein. 2024-25 Ch_11.indd   304 10-08-2022   10:03:35