2 Lines and Angles In this chapter, we will explore some of the most basic ideas of geometry including points, lines, rays, line segments and angles. These ideas form the building blocks of ‘plane geometry’, and will help us in understanding more advanced topics in geometry such as the construction and analysis of different shapes. 2.1 Point Mark a dot on the paper with a sharp tip of a pencil. The sharper the tip, the thinner will be the dot. This tiny dot will give you an idea of a point. A point determines a precise location, but it has no length, breadth or height. Some models for a point are given below. The tip of a compass The sharpened end of a pencil The pointed end of a needle If you mark three points on a piece of paper, you may be required to distinguish these three points. For this purpose, each of the three points may be denoted by a single capital letter such as Chapter 2_Lines and Angles.indd 13 Z P T 13-08-2024 16:14:25 Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 Z, P and T. These points are read as ‘Point Z’, ‘Point P’ and ‘Point T’. Of course, the dots represent precise locations and must be imagined to be invisibly thin. 2.2 Line Segment Fold a piece of paper and unfold it. Do you see a crease? This gives the idea of a line segment. It has two end points, A and B. Mark any two points A and B on a sheet of paper. Try to connect A to B by various routes (Fig. 2.1). What is the shortest route from A to B? This shortest path from point A to Point B (including A and B) as shown here is called the line segment from A to B. It is denoted by either AB or BA. The points A and B are called the end points of the line segment AB. 2.3 Line A B B A Fig. 2.1 m Imagine that the line segment from A to B (i.e., B AB) is extended beyond A in one direction and beyond B in the other direction without any end (see Fig. 2.2). This is a model for a line. Do A you think you can draw a complete picture of Fig. 2.2 a line? No. Why? A line through two points A and B is written as AB . It extends forever in both directions. Sometimes a line is denoted by a letter like l or m. Observe that any two points determine a unique line that passes through both of them. 14 Chapter 2_Lines and Angles.indd 14 13-08-2024 16:14:25 Lines and Angles 2.4 Ray A ray is a portion of a line that starts at one point (called the starting point or initial point of the ray) and goes on endlessly in a direction. The following are some models for a ray: Beam of light from a lighthouse Ray of light from a torch Sun rays Look at the diagram (Fig. 2.3) of a ray. Two points are marked on it. One is the starting point A and the other is a point P on the path of the ray. We then denote the ray by AP. P A Fig. 2.3 Figure it Out 1. Rihan marked a point on a piece of paper. How many lines can he draw that pass through the point? Sheetal marked two points on a piece of paper. How many different lines can she draw that pass through both of the points? Can you help Rihan and Sheetal find their answers? 15 Chapter 2_Lines and Angles.indd 15 13-08-2024 16:14:25 Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 2. Name the line segments in Fig. 2.4. Which of the five marked points are on exactly one of the line segments? Which are on two of the line segments? Q M R P L Fig. 2.4 3.	Name the rays shown in Fig. 2.5. Is T the starting point of each of these rays? A T N B Fig. 2.5 4. Draw a rough figure and write labels appropriately to illustrate each of the following: a. OP and OQ meet at O. b. XY and PQ intersect at point M. c. Line l contains points E and F but not point D. d. Point P lies on AB.  5. In Fig. 2.6, name: a. Five points B b. A line O c. Four rays d. Five line segments C E D Fig. 2.6 16 Chapter 2_Lines and Angles.indd 16 13-08-2024 16:14:25 Lines and Angles 6. Here is a ray OA (Fig. 2.7). It starts at O and passes through the point A. It also passes through the point B. A B a. Can you also name it as OB ? Why? b. Can we write OA as AO ? Why or why not? O Fig. 2.7 2.5 Angle D m ar An angle is formed by two rays having a common starting point. Here is an angle B formed by rays BD and BE where B is vertex arm the common starting point (Fig. 2.8). The point B is called the vertex of the E angle, and the rays BD and BE are called Fig. 2.8 the arms of the angle. How can we name this angle? We can simply use the vertex and say that it is the Angle B. To be clearer, we use a point on each of the arms together with the vertex to name the angle. In this case, we name the angle as Angle DBE or Angle EBD. The word angle can be replaced by the symbol ‘∠’, i.e., ∠DBE or ∠EBD. Note that in specifying the angle, the vertex is always written as the middle letter. To indicate an angle, we use a small curve at the vertex (refer to Fig. 2.9). Vidya has just opened her book. Let us observe her opening the cover of the book in different scenarios. Case 1 Case 2 Case 3 Case 4 Case 5 Case 6 17 Chapter 2_Lines and Angles.indd 17 13-08-2024 16:14:27 Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 Do you see angles being made in each of these cases? Can you mark their arms and vertex? Which angle is greater—the angle in Case 1 or the angle in Case 2? Just as we talk about the size of a line based on its length, we also talk about the size of an angle based on its amount of rotation. So, the angle in Case 2 is greater as in this case she needs to rotate the cover more. Similarly, the angle in Case 3 is even larger than that of Case 2, because there is even more rotation, and Cases 4, 5, and 6 are successively larger angles with more and more rotation. The size of an angle is the amount of rotation or turn that is needed about the vertex to move the first ray to the second ray. Final position of ray Amount of turn is the size of the angle Initial position of ray Vertex Fig. 2.9 Let’s look at some other examples where angles arise in real life by rotation or turn: • In a compass or divider, we turn the arms to form an angle. The vertex is the point where the two arms are joined. Identify the arms and vertex of the angle. • A pair of scissors has two blades. When we open them (or ‘turn them’) to cut something, the blades form an angle. Identify the arms and the vertex of the angle. 18 Chapter 2_Lines and Angles.indd 18 13-08-2024 16:14:27 Lines and Angles • Look at the pictures of spectacles, wallet and other common objects. Identify the angles in them by marking out their arms and vertices. Do you see how these angles are formed by turning one arm with respect to the other? Teacher’s Note Teacher needs to organise various activities with the students to recognise the size of an angle as a measure of rotation. Figure it Out 1.	Can you find the angles in the given pictures? Draw the rays forming any one of the angles and name the vertex of the angle. B C A D 19 Chapter 2_Lines and Angles.indd 19 13-08-2024 16:14:28 Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 2. Draw and label an angle with arms ST and SR. 3. Explain why ∠APC cannot be labelled as ∠P. Math Talk A P B C 4. Name the angles marked in the given figure. P Q T 5. R Mark any three points on your paper that are not on one line. Label them A, B, C. Draw all possible lines going through pairs of these points. How many lines do you get? Name them. How many angles can you name using A, B, C? Write them down, and mark each of them with a curve as in Fig. 2.9. 20 Chapter 2_Lines and Angles.indd 20 13-08-2024 16:14:28 Lines and Angles 6. Now mark any four points on your paper so that no three of them are on one line. Label them A, B, C, D. Draw all possible lines going through pairs of these points. How many lines do you get? Name them. How many angles can you name using A, B, C, D? Write them all down, and mark each of them with a curve as in Fig. 2.9. 2.6 Comparing Angles Look at these animals opening their mouths. Do you see any angles here? If yes, mark the arms and vertex of each one. Some mouths are open wider than others; the more the turning of the jaws, the larger the angle! Can you arrange the angles in this picture from smallest to largest? Is it always easy to compare two angles? Math Talk Here are some angles. Label each of the angles. How will you compare them? Draw a few more angles; label them and compare. 21 Chapter 2_Lines and Angles.indd 21 13-08-2024 16:14:28 Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 Comparing angles by superimposition Any two angles can be compared by placing them one over the other, i.e., by superimposition. While superimposing, the vertices of the angles must overlap. After superimposition, it becomes clear which angle is smaller and which is larger. P A B C Q P R Q (B) A RC The picture shows the two angles superimposed. It is now clear that ∠PQR is larger than ∠ABC. Equal angles. Now consider ∠AOB and ∠XOY in the figure. Which is greater? X A X A O B O Y O B Y The corners of both of these angles match and the arms overlap with each other, i.e., OA ↔ OX and OB ↔ OY. So, the angles are equal in size. The reason these angles are considered to be equal in size is because when we visualise each of these angles as being formed out of rotation, we can see that there is an equal amount of rotation needed to move OB to OA and OY to OX . From the point of view of superimposition, when two angles are superimposed, and the common vertex and the two rays of both angles lie on top of each other, then the sizes of the angles are equal. 22 Chapter 2_Lines and Angles.indd 22 13-08-2024 16:14:29 Lines and Angles Where else do we use superimposition to compare? Math Talk Figure it Out 1. Fold a rectangular sheet of paper, then draw a line along the fold created. Name and compare the angles formed between the fold and the sides of the paper. Make different angles by folding a rectangular sheet of paper and compare the angles. Which is the largest and smallest angle you made? 2. In each case, determine which angle is greater and why. a. ∠AOB or ∠XOY X b. ∠AOB or ∠XOB c. ∠XOB or ∠XOC Discuss with your friends on how you decided which one is greater. 3. A O Y B C Which angle is greater: ∠XOY or ∠AOB? Give reasons. Math Talk A X Y O B Comparing angles without superimposition Two cranes are arguing about who can open their mouth wider, i.e., who is making a bigger angle. Let us first draw their angles. How do we know which one is bigger? As seen Fig. 2.10 23 Chapter 2_Lines and Angles.indd 23 13-08-2024 16:14:29 Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 before, one could trace these angles, superimpose them and then check. But can we do it without superimposition? Suppose we have a transparent circle which can be moved and placed on figures. Can we use this for comparison? Let us place the circular paper on the angle made by the first crane. The circle is placed in such a way that its centre is on the vertex of the angle. Let us mark the points A and B on the edge circle at the points where the arms of the angle pass through the circle. B B O O A A Can we use this to find out if this angle is greater than, or equal to or smaller than the angle made by the second crane? Let us place it on the angle made by the second crane so that the vertex coincides with the centre of the circle and one of the arms passes through OA. B Y O A X Can you now tell which angle is bigger? 24 Chapter 2_Lines and Angles.indd 24 13-08-2024 16:14:29 Lines and Angles Which crane was making the bigger angle? If you can make a circular piece of transparent paper, try this method to compare the angles in Fig. 2.10 with each other. Teacher’s Note A teacher needs to check the understanding of the students around the notion of an angle. Sometimes students might think that increasing the length of the arms of the angle increases the angle. For this, various situations should be posed to the students to check their understanding on the same. 2.7 Making Rotating Arms Let us make ‘rotating arms’ using two paper straws and a paper clip by following these steps: 1. Take two paper straws and a paper clip.  2. Insert the straws into the arms of the paper clip. 3. Your rotating arm is ready! Make several ‘rotating arms’ with different angles between the arms. Arrange the angles you have made from smallest to largest by comparing and using superimposition. Passing through a slit: Collect a number of rotating arms with different angles; do not rotate any of the rotating arms during this activity. 25 Chapter 2_Lines and Angles.indd 25 13-08-2024 16:14:30 Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 Take a cardboard and make an angle-shaped slit as shown below by tracing and cutting out the shape of one of the rotating arms. Now, shuffle and mix up all the rotating arms. Can you identify which of the rotating arms will pass through the slit? The correct one can be found by placing each of the rotating arms over the slit. Let us do this for some of the rotating arms: Slit angle is greater than the arms’ angle. The arms will not go through the slit. Slit angle is less than the arms’ angle. The arms will not go through the slit. Slit angle is equal to the arms’ angle. The arms will go through the slit. Only the pair of rotating arms where the angle is equal to that of the slit passes through the slit. Note that the possibility of passing through the slit depends only on the angle between the rotating arms and not on their lengths (as long as they are shorter than the length of the slit). 26 Chapter 2_Lines and Angles.indd 26 13-08-2024 16:14:31 Lines and Angles Challenge: Reduce this angle. Angle reduced. The angle is still the same! 2.8 Special Types of Angles Let us go back to Vidya’s notebook and observe her opening the cover of the book in different scenarios. She makes a full turn of the cover when she has to write while holding the book in her hand. She makes a half turn of the cover when she has to open it on her table. In this case, observe the arms of the angle formed. They lie in a straight line. Such an angle is called a straight angle. A O B Let us consider a straight angle ∠AOB. Observe that any ray OC divides it into two angles, ∠AOC and ∠COB. 27 Chapter 2_Lines and Angles.indd 27 13-08-2024 16:14:33 Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 Is it possible to draw OC such that the two angles are equal to each other in size? Math Talk Let’s Explore We can try to solve this problem using a piece of paper. Recall that when a fold is made, it creates a crease which is straight. Take a rectangular piece of paper and on one of its sides, mark the straight angle AOB. By folding, try to get a line (crease) passing through O that divides ∠AOB into two equal angles. How can it be done? Fold the paper such that OB overlaps with OA. Observe the crease and the two angles formed. 28 Chapter 2_Lines and Angles.indd 28 13-08-2024 16:14:33 Lines and Angles Justify why the two angles are equal. Is there a way to superimpose and check? Can this superimposition be done by folding? Each of these equal angles formed are called right angles. So, a straight angle contains two right angles. Why shouldn't you argue with a 90 ̊ angle? Because they're always right. If a straight angle is formed by half of a full turn, how much of a full turn will form a right angle?  Observe that a right angle resembles the shape of an ‘L’. An angle is a right angle only if it is exactly half of a straight angle. Two lines that meet at right angles are called perpendicular lines. Figure it Out 1. How many right angles do the windows of your classroom contain? Do you see other right angles in your classroom? 29 Chapter 2_Lines and Angles.indd 29 13-08-2024 16:14:33 Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 2. Join A to other grid points in the figure by a straight line to get a straight angle. What are all the different ways of doing it? A B A B 3. Now join A to other grid points in the figure by a straight line to get a right angle. What are all the different ways of doing it? A B A B Hint: Extend the line further as shown in the figure below. To get a right angle at A, we need to draw a line through it that divides the straight angle CAB into two equal parts. C A B 30 Chapter 2_Lines and Angles.indd 30 13-08-2024 16:14:33 Lines and Angles 4.	Get a slanting crease on the paper. Now, try to get another crease that is perpendicular to the slanting crease. a. H  ow many right angles do you have now? Justify why the angles are exact right angles. b. D  escribe how you folded the paper so that any other person who doesn’t know the process can simply follow your description to get the right angle. Classifying Angles Angles are classified in three groups as shown below. Right angles are shown in the second group. What could be the common feature of the other two groups? In the first group, all angles are less than a right angle or in other words, less than a quarter turn. Such angles are called acute angles. In the third group, all angles are greater than a right angle but less than a straight angle. The turning is more than a quarter turn and less than a half turn. Such angles are called obtuse angles. Figure it Out 1. Identify acute, right, obtuse and straight angles in the previous figures. 2. Make a few acute angles and a few obtuse angles. Draw them in different orientations. 31 Chapter 2_Lines and Angles.indd 31 13-08-2024 16:14:34 Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 3. Do you know what the words acute and obtuse mean? Acute means sharp and obtuse means blunt. Why do you think these words have been chosen? 4. Find out the number of acute angles in each of the figures below. What will be the next figure and how many acute angles will it have? Do you notice any pattern in the numbers? 2.9 Measuring Angles We have seen how to compare two angles. But can we actually quantify how big an angle is using a number without having to compare it to another angle? We saw how various angles can be compared using a circle. Perhaps a circle could be used to assign measures for angles? Fig. 2.12 To assign precise measures to angles, mathematicians came up with an idea. They divided the angle in the centre of the circle into 32 Chapter 2_Lines and Angles.indd 32 13-08-2024 16:14:34 Lines and Angles 360 equal angles or parts. The angle measure of each of these unit parts is 1 degree, which is written as 1°. This unit part is used to assign measure to any angle: the measure of an angle is the number of 1° unit parts it contains inside it. For example, see this figure: 30 units It contains 30 units of 1° angle and so we say that its angle measure is 30°. Measures of different angles: What is the measure of a full turn in degrees? As we have taken it to contain 360 degrees, its measure is 360°. What is the measure of a straight angle in degrees? A straight angle is half of a full turn. As a full-turn is 360°, a half turn is 180°. What is the measure of a right angle in degrees? Two right angles together form a straight angle. As a straight angle measures 180°, a right angle measures 90°. 180 units A O B A B O A A 90 units O B O B A pinch of history A full turn has been divided into 360°. Why 360? The reason why we use 360° today is not fully known. The division of a circle into 33 Chapter 2_Lines and Angles.indd 33 14-08-2024 14:20:43 Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 360 parts goes back to ancient times. The Rigveda, one of the very oldest texts of humanity going back thousands of years, speaks of a wheel with 360 spokes (Verse 1.164.48). Many ancient calendars, also going back over 3000 years—such as calendars of India, Persia, Babylonia and Egypt—were based on having 360 days in a year. In addition, Babylonian mathematicians frequently used divisions of 60 and 360 due to their use of sexagesimal numbers and counting by 60s. Perhaps the most important and practical answer for why mathematicians over the years have liked and continued to use 360 degrees is that 360 is the smallest number that can be evenly divided by all numbers up to 10, aside from 7. Thus, one can break up the circle into 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9 or 10 equal parts, and still have a whole number of degrees in each part! Note that 360 is also evenly divisible by 12, the number of months in a year, and by 24, the number of hours in a day. These facts all make the number 360 very useful. The circle has been divided into 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9 10 and 12 parts below. What are the degree measures of the resulting angles? Write the degree measures down near the indicated angles. Degree measures of different angles How can we measure other angles in degrees? It is for this purpose that we have a tool called a protractor that is either a circle divided into 360 equal parts as shown in Fig. 2.12 (on page 32), or a half circle divided into 180 equal parts. 34 Chapter 2_Lines and Angles.indd 34 14-08-2024 14:20:57 Lines and Angles Unlabelled protractor Here is a protractor. Do you see the straight angle at the center divided into 180 units of 1 degree? Only part of the lines dividing the straight angle are visible, though! Starting from the marking on the rightmost point of the base, there is a long mark for every 10°. From every such long mark, there is a medium sized mark after 5°. Figure it out 1. Write the measures of the following angles: K L A W