CHAPTER 5 MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE 5.1 The DNA 5.2 The Search for Genetic Material In the previous chapter, you have learnt the inheritance patterns and the genetic basis of such patterns. At the 5.3 RNA World time of Mendel, the nature of those ‘factors’ regulating 5.4 Replication the pattern of inheritance was not clear. Over the next hundred years, the nature of the putative genetic material 5.5 Transcription was investigated culminating in the realisation that 5.6 Genetic Code DNA – deoxyribonucleic acid – is the genetic material, at least for the majority of organisms. In class XI you have 5.7 Translation learnt that nucleic acids are polymers of nucleotides. 5.8 Regulation of Gene Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid Expression (RNA) are the two types of nucleic acids found in living 5.9 Human Genome Project systems. DNA acts as the genetic material in most of the organisms. RNA though it also acts as a genetic material 5.10 DNA Fingerprinting in some viruses, mostly functions as a messenger. RNA has additional roles as well. It functions as adapter, structural, and in some cases as a catalytic molecule. In Class XI you have already learnt the structures of nucleotides and the way these monomer units are linked to form nucleic acid polymers. In this chapter we are going to discuss the structure of DNA, its replication, the process of making RNA from DNA (transcription), the genetic code that determines the sequences of amino acids in proteins, the process of protein synthesis (translation) and elementary basis of their regulation. The determination 2024-25 BIOLOGY of complete nucleotide sequence of human genome during last decade has set in a new era of genomics. In the last section, the essentials of human genome sequencing and its consequences will also be discussed. Let us begin our discussion by first understanding the structure of the most interesting molecule in the living system, that is, the DNA. In subsequent sections, we will understand that why it is the most abundant genetic material, and what its relationship is with RNA. 5.1 THE DNA DNA is a long polymer of deoxyribonucleotides.  The length of DNA is usually defined as number of nucleotides (or a pair of nucleotide referred to as base pairs) present in it.  This also is the characteristic of an organism. For example, a bacteriophage known as φ×174 has 5386 nucleotides, Bacteriophage lambda has 48502 base pairs (bp), Escherichia coli  has 4.6 × 106 bp, and haploid content of human DNA is 3.3 × 109 bp. Let us discuss the structure of such a long polymer. 5.1.1 Structure of Polynucleotide Chain Let us recapitulate the chemical structure of a polynucleotide chain (DNA or RNA). A nucleotide has three components – a nitrogenous base, a pentose sugar (ribose in case of RNA, and deoxyribose for DNA), and a phosphate group. There are two types of nitrogenous bases – Purines (Adenine and Guanine), and Pyrimidines (Cytosine, Uracil and Thymine). Cytosine is common for both DNA and RNA and Thymine is present in DNA. Uracil is  present in RNA at the place of Thymine. A nitrogenous base is linked to the OH of 1' C pentose sugar through a N-glycosidic linkage to form a nucleoside, such as adenosine or deoxyadenosine, guanosine or deoxyguanosine, cytidine or deoxycytidine and uridine or deoxythymidine.  When a phosphate group is linked to OH of 5' C  of a nucleoside through phosphoester linkage, a corresponding nucleotide (or deoxynucleotide depending upon the type of sugar present) is formed. Two nucleotides are linked through 3'-5'  phosphodiester linkage to form a dinucleotide.  More nucleotides can be joined in such a manner to form a polynucleotide chain. A polymer thus formed has at one end a free 80 Figure 5.1 A Polynucleotide chain 2024-25 MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE phosphate moiety at 5'-end of sugar, which is referred to as 5’-end of polynucleotide chain. Similarly, at the other end of the polymer the sugar has a free OH of 3'C  group which is referred to as 3' -end of the polynucleotide chain.  The backbone of a polynucleotide chain is formed due to sugar and phosphates. The nitrogenous bases linked to sugar moiety project from the backbone (Figure 5.1). In RNA, every nucleotide residue has an additional –OH group present at 2'-position in the ribose. Also, in RNA the uracil is found at the place of thymine (5-methyl uracil, another chemical name for thymine). DNA  as an acidic substance present in nucleus was first identified by Friedrich Meischer in 1869. He named it as ‘Nuclein’. However, due to technical limitation in isolating such a long polymer intact, the elucidation of structure of DNA remained elusive for a very long period of time.  It was only in 1953 that James Watson and Francis Crick, based on the X-ray diffraction data produced by Maurice Wilkins and Rosalind Franklin, proposed a very simple but famous Double Helix model for the structure of DNA.  One of the hallmarks of their proposition was base pairing between the two strands of polynucleotide chains.  However, this proposition was also based on the observation of Erwin Chargaff that for a double stranded DNA, the ratios between Adenine and Thymine and Guanine and Cytosine are constant and equals one. The base pairing confers a very unique property to the polynucleotide chains. They are said to be complementary to each other, and therefore if the sequence of bases in one strand is known then the sequence in other strand can be predicted. Also, if each strand from a DNA (let us call it as a parental DNA) acts as a template for synthesis of a new strand, the two double stranded DNA (let us call them as daughter DNA) thus, produced would be identical to the parental DNA molecule. Because of this, the genetic implications of the structure of DNA became very clear. The salient features of the Double-helix structure of DNA are as follows: (i) It is made of two polynucleotide chains, where the backbone is constituted by sugar-phosphate, and the bases project inside. (ii) The two chains have anti-parallel polarity. It means, if one chain has the polarity 5'à3' , the other has 3'à5 ' . (iii) The bases in two strands are paired through hydrogen bond (H-bonds) forming base pairs (bp). Adenine forms two hydrogen bonds with Thymine from opposite strand and vice-versa. Similarly, Guanine is bonded with Cytosine with three H-bonds. As a result, always a purine comes opposite to a pyrimidine. This 81 generates approximately uniform distance between the two strands of the helix (Figure 5.2). (iv) The two chains are coiled in a right-handed fashion. The pitch of the helix is 3.4 nm (a nanometre is one billionth of a metre, that is 10-9 m) and there are roughly 10 bp in each 2024-25 BIOLOGY Figure 5.2 Double stranded polynucleotide chain turn. Consequently, the distance between a bp in a helix is approximately 0.34 nm. (v) The plane of one base pair stacks over the other in double helix. This, in addition to H-bonds, confers stability of the helical structure (Figure 5.3). Compare the structure of purines and pyrimidines. Can you find out why the distance between two polynucleotide chains in DNA remains almost constant? The proposition of a double helix structure for DNA and its simplicity in explaining the genetic implication became revolutionary. Very soon, Francis Crick proposed the Central dogma in molecular biology, which states that the genetic Figure 5.3 DNA double helix information flows from DNAàRNAàProtein. 82 Central dogma 2024-25 MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE In some viruses the flow of information is in reverse direction, that is, from RNA to DNA. Can you suggest a simple name to the process? 5.1.2  Packaging of DNA Helix Taken the distance between two consecutive base pairs as 0.34 nm (0.34×10–9 m), if the length of DNA double helix in a typical mammalian cell is calculated (simply by multiplying the total number of bp with distance between two consecutive bp, that is, 6.6 × 109 bp × 0.34 × 10-9m/bp), it comes out to be approximately 2.2 metres. A length that is far greater than the dimension of a typical nucleus (approximately 10–6 m). How is such a long polymer packaged in a cell? If the length of E. coli DNA is 1.36 mm, can you calculate the number of base pairs in E.coli? In prokaryotes, such as, E. coli, though they do not have a defined nucleus, the DNA is not scattered Figure 5.4a Nucleosome throughout the cell.  DNA (being negatively charged) is held with some proteins (that have positive charges) in a region termed as ‘nucleoid’.  The DNA in nucleoid is organised in large loops held by proteins. In eukaryotes, this organisation is much more complex.  There is a set of positively charged, basic proteins called histones.  A protein acquires charge depending upon the abundance of amino acids residues with charged side chains. Histones are rich in the basic amino acid residues lysine and arginine. Both the amino acid residues carry positive charges Figure 5.4b EM picture - ‘Beads-on-String’ in their side chains. Histones are organised to form a unit of eight molecules called histone octamer. The negatively charged DNA is wrapped around the positively charged histone octamer to form a structure called nucleosome (Figure 5.4 a). A typical nucleosome contains 200 bp of DNA helix.  Nucleosomes constitute the repeating unit of a structure in nucleus called chromatin, threadlike stained (coloured) bodies seen in nucleus. The nucleosomes in chromatin are seen as ‘beads-on-string’ structure when viewed under electron microscope (EM) (Figure 5.4 b). 83 Theoretically, how many such beads (nucleosomes) do you imagine are present in a mammalian cell? The beads-on-string structure in chromatin is packaged to form chromatin fibers that are further coiled and condensed at metaphase stage of cell division to form chromosomes. The packaging of chromatin at higher level requires additional set of proteins that collectively are referred to as 2024-25 BIOLOGY Non-histone Chromosomal (NHC) proteins.  In a typical nucleus, some region of chromatin are loosely packed (and stains light) and are referred to as euchromatin. The chromatin that is more densely packed and stains dark are called as Heterochromatin.  Euchromatin is said to be transcriptionally active chromatin, whereas heterochromatin is inactive. 5.2 THE SEARCH FOR GENETIC MATERIAL Even though the discovery of nuclein by Meischer and the proposition for principles of inheritance by Mendel were almost at the same time, but that the DNA acts as a genetic material took long to be discovered and proven. By 1926, the quest to determine the mechanism for genetic inheritance had reached the molecular level. Previous discoveries by Gregor Mendel, Walter Sutton, Thomas Hunt Morgan and numerous other scientists had narrowed the search to the chromosomes located in the nucleus of most cells. But the question of what molecule was actually the genetic material, had not been answered. Transforming Principle In 1928, Frederick Griffith, in a series of experiments with Streptococcus pneumoniae (bacterium responsible for pneumonia), witnessed a miraculous transformation in the bacteria. During the course of his experiment, a living organism (bacteria) had changed in physical form. When Streptococcus pneumoniae (pneumococcus) bacteria are grown on a culture plate, some produce smooth shiny colonies (S) while others produce rough colonies (R). This is because the S strain bacteria have a mucous (polysaccharide) coat, while R strain does not. Mice infected with the S strain (virulent) die from pneumonia infection but mice infected with the R strain do not develop pneumonia. Griffith was able to kill bacteria by heating them. He observed that heat-killed S strain bacteria injected into mice did not kill them. When he 84 2024-25 MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE injected a mixture of heat-killed S and live R bacteria, the mice died. Moreover, he recovered living S bacteria from the dead mice. He concluded that the R strain bacteria had somehow been transformed by the heat-killed S strain bacteria. Some ‘transforming principle’, transferred from the heat-killed S strain, had enabled the R strain to synthesise a smooth polysaccharide coat and become virulent. This must be due to the transfer of the genetic material. However, the biochemical nature of genetic material was not defined from his experiments. Biochemical Characterisation of Transforming Principle Prior to the work of Oswald Avery, Colin MacLeod and Maclyn McCarty (1933-44), the genetic material was thought to be a protein.  They worked to determine the biochemical nature of ‘transforming principle’ in Griffith's experiment. They purified biochemicals (proteins, DNA, RNA, etc.) from the heat-killed S cells to see which ones could transform live R cells into S cells. They discovered that DNA alone from S bacteria caused R bacteria to become transformed. They also discovered that protein-digesting enzymes (proteases) and RNA-digesting enzymes (RNases) did not affect transformation, so the transforming substance was not a protein or RNA. Digestion with DNase did inhibit transformation, suggesting that the DNA caused the transformation. They concluded that DNA is the hereditary material, but not all biologists were convinced. Can you think of any difference between DNAs and DNase? 5.2.1 The Genetic Material is DNA The unequivocal proof that DNA is the genetic material came from the experiments of Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase (1952). They worked with viruses that infect bacteria called bacteriophages. The bacteriophage attaches to the bacteria and its genetic material then enters the bacterial cell. The bacterial cell treats the viral genetic material as if it was its own and subsequently manufactures more virus particles. Hershey and Chase worked to discover whether it was protein or DNA from the viruses that entered the bacteria. They grew some viruses on a medium that contained radioactive phosphorus and some others on medium that contained radioactive sulfur. 85 Viruses grown in the presence of radioactive phosphorus contained radioactive DNA but not radioactive protein because DNA contains phosphorus but protein does not.  Similarly, viruses grown on radioactive sulfur contained radioactive protein but not radioactive DNA because DNA does not contain sulfur. 2024-25 BIOLOGY Radioactive phages were allowed to attach to E. coli bacteria. Then, as the infection proceeded, the viral coats were removed from the bacteria by agitating them in a blender. The virus particles were separated from the bacteria by spinning them in a centrifuge. Bacteria which was infected with viruses that had radioactive DNA were radioactive, indicating that DNA was the material that passed from the virus to the bacteria. Bacteria that were infected with viruses that had radioactive proteins were not radioactive. This indicates that proteins did not enter the bacteria from the viruses. DNA is therefore the genetic material that is passed from virus to bacteria (Figure 5.5). Figure 5.5 The Hershey-Chase experiment 86 5.2.2 Properties of Genetic Material (DNA versus RNA) From the foregoing discussion, it is clear that the debate between proteins versus DNA as the genetic material was unequivocally resolved from Hershey-Chase experiment. It became an established fact that it is DNA that acts as genetic material. However, it subsequently became clear that 2024-25 MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE in some viruses, RNA is the genetic material (for example, Tobacco Mosaic viruses, QB bacteriophage, etc.).  Answer to some of the questions such as, why DNA is the predominant genetic material, whereas RNA performs dynamic functions of messenger and adapter has to be found from the differences between chemical structures of the two nucleic acid molecules. Can you recall the two chemical differences between DNA and RNA? A molecule that can act as a genetic material must fulfill the following criteria: (i) It should be able to generate its replica (Replication). (ii) It should be stable chemically and structurally. (iii) It should provide the scope for slow changes (mutation) that are required for evolution. (iv) It should be able to express itself in the form of 'Mendelian Characters’. If one examines each requirement one by one, because of rule of base pairing and complementarity, both the nucleic acids (DNA and RNA) have the ability to direct their duplications. The other molecules in the living system, such as proteins fail to fulfill first criteria itself. The genetic material should be stable enough not to change with different stages of life cycle, age or with change in physiology of the organism.  Stability as one of the properties of genetic material was very evident in Griffith’s ‘transforming principle’ itself that heat, which killed the bacteria, at least did not destroy some of the properties of genetic material. This now can easily be explained in light of the DNA that the two strands being complementary if separated by heating come together, when appropriate conditions are provided.  Further, 2'-OH group present at every nucleotide in RNA is a reactive group and makes RNA labile and easily degradable. RNA is also now known to be catalytic, hence reactive. Therefore, DNA chemically is less reactive and structurally more stable when compared to RNA. Therefore, among the two nucleic acids, the DNA is a better genetic material. In fact, the presence of thymine at the place of uracil also confers additional stability to DNA. (Detailed discussion about this requires understanding of the process of repair in DNA, and you will study these processes in higher classes.) Both DNA and RNA are able to mutate.  In fact, RNA being unstable, mutate at a faster rate.  Consequently, viruses having RNA genome and 87 having shorter life span mutate and evolve faster. RNA can directly code for the synthesis of proteins, hence can easily express the characters.  DNA, however, is dependent on RNA for synthesis of proteins.  The protein synthesising machinery has evolved around RNA. The above discussion indicate that both RNA and DNA can function as 2024-25 BIOLOGY genetic material, but DNA being more stable is preferred for storage of genetic information. For the transmission of genetic information, RNA is better. 5.3 RNA WORLD From foregoing discussion, an immediate question becomes evident – which is the first genetic material? It shall be discussed in detail in the chapter on chemical evolution, but briefly, we shall highlight some of the facts and points. RNA was the first genetic material.  There is now enough evidence to suggest that essential life processes (such as metabolism, translation, splicing, etc.), evolved around RNA. RNA used to act as a genetic material as well as a catalyst (there are some important biochemical reactions in living systems that are catalysed by RNA catalysts and not by protein enzymes). But, RNA being a catalyst was reactive and hence unstable.  Therefore, DNA has evolved from RNA with chemical modifications that make it more stable. DNA being double stranded and having complementary strand further resists changes by evolving a process of repair. 5.4 REPLICATION While proposing the double helical structure for DNA, Watson and Crick had immediately proposed a scheme for replication of DNA. To quote their original statement that is as follows: ‘‘It has not escaped our notice that the specific pairing we have postulated immediately suggests a possible copying mechanism for the genetic material’’ (Watson and Crick, 1953). The scheme suggested that the two strands would separate and act as a template for the synthesis of new Figure 5.6 Watson-Crick model for complementary strands. After the completion of semiconservative DNA replication, each DNA molecule would have one replication parental and one newly synthesised strand. This scheme was termed as semiconservative DNA 88 replication (Figure 5.6). 5.4.1 The Experimental Proof It is now proven that DNA replicates semiconservatively.  It was shown first in Escherichia coli and subsequently in higher organisms, such as plants 2024-25 MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE and human cells. Matthew Meselson and Franklin Stahl performed the following experiment in 1958: (i) They grew E. coli in a medium containing 15NH Cl (15N is the heavy 4 isotope of nitrogen) as the only nitrogen source for many generations. The result was that 15N was incorporated into newly synthesised DNA (as well as other nitrogen containing compounds). This heavy DNA molecule could be distinguished from the normal DNA by centrifugation in a cesium chloride (CsCl) density gradient (Please note that 15N is not a radioactive isotope, and it can be separated from 14N only based on densities). (ii) Then they transferred the cells into a medium with normal 14NH Cl and took samples at various definite time intervals as 4 the cells multiplied, and extracted the DNA that remained as double-stranded helices.  The various samples were separated independently on CsCl gradients to measure the densities of DNA (Figure 5.7). Can you recall what centrifugal force is, and think why a molecule with higher mass/density would sediment faster? The results are shown in Figure 5.7. Figure 5.7 Meselson and Stahl’s Experiment 89 (iii) Thus, the DNA that was extracted from the culture one generation after the transfer from 15N to 14N medium [that is after 20 minutes; E. coli divides in 20 minutes] had a hybrid or intermediate density.  DNA extracted from the culture after another generation [that is after 40 minutes, II generation] was 2024-25 BIOLOGY composed of equal amounts of this hybrid DNA and of ‘light’ DNA. If E. coli was allowed to grow for 80 minutes then what would be the proportions of light and hybrid densities DNA molecule? Very similar experiments involving use of radioactive thymidine to detect distribution of newly synthesised DNA in the chromosomes was performed on Vicia faba (faba beans) by Taylor and colleagues in 1958. The experiments proved that the DNA in chromosomes also replicate semiconservatively. 5.4.2 The Machinery and the Enzymes In living cells, such as E. coli, the process of replication requires a set of catalysts (enzymes).  The main enzyme is referred to as DNA-dependent DNA polymerase, since it uses a DNA template to catalyse the polymerisation of deoxynucleotides. These enzymes are highly efficient enzymes as they have to catalyse polymerisation of a large number of nucleotides in a very short time. E. coli that has only 4.6 ×106 bp (compare it with human whose diploid content is 6.6 × 109 bp), completes the process of replication within 18 minutes; that means the average rate of polymerisation has to be approximately 2000 bp per second. Not only do these polymerases have to be fast, but they also have to catalyse the reaction with high degree of accuracy.  Any mistake during replication would result into mutations.  Furthermore, energetically replication is a very expensive process. Deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates serve dual purposes. In addition to acting as substrates, they provide energy for polymerisation reaction (the two terminal phosphates in a deoxynucleoside triphosphates are high-energy phosphates, same as in case of ATP). In addition to DNA-dependent DNA polymerases, many additional enzymes are required to complete the process of replication with high degree of accuracy.  For long DNA molecules, since the two strands of DNA cannot be separated in its entire length (due to very high energy requirement), the replication occur within a small opening of the DNA helix, referred to as replication fork. The DNA-dependent DNA polymerases catalyse polymerisation only in one direction, that is 5'à3' . This creates some additional complications at the replicating fork. Consequently, on one strand (the template with polarity 3'à5' ), the replication is continuous, while on the other (the template with 90 polarity 5'à3' ), it is discontinuous. The discontinuously synthesised fragments are later joined by the enzyme DNA ligase (Figure 5.8). The DNA polymerases on their own cannot initiate the process of replication.  Also the replication does not initiate randomly at any place in DNA. There is a definite region in E. coli DNA where the replication originates. Such regions are termed as origin of replication. It is 2024-25 MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE because of the requirement of the origin of replication that a piece of DNA if needed to be propagated during recombinant DNA procedures, requires a vector. The vectors provide the origin of replication. Further, not every detail of replication is understood well.  In eukaryotes, the replication of DNA takes place at S-phase of the cell-cycle.  The replication of DNA and cell division cycle should be highly coordinated. A failure in cell division after DNA replication results into polyploidy(a chromosomal anomaly). You will learn the detailed nature of origin and the processes occurring at this site, in higher classes. 5.5 TRANSCRIPTION The process of copying genetic information from one Figure 5.8 Replicating Fork strand of the DNA into RNA is termed as transcription. Here also, the principle of complementarity governs the process of transcription, except the adenosine complements now forms base pair with uracil instead of thymine.  However, unlike in the process of replication, which once set in, the total DNA of an organism gets duplicated, in transcription only a segment of DNA and only one of the strands is copied into RNA.  This necessitates defining the boundaries that would demarcate the region and the strand of DNA that would be transcribed. Why both the strands are not copied during transcription has the simple answer. First, if both strands act as a template, they would code for RNA molecule with different sequences (Remember complementarity does not mean identical), and in turn, if they code for proteins, the sequence of amino acids in the proteins would be different. Hence, one segment of the DNA would be coding for two different proteins, and this would complicate the genetic information transfer machinery. Second, the two RNA molecules if produced simultaneously would be complementary to each other, hence would form a double stranded RNA. This would prevent RNA from being translated into protein and the exercise of transcription would become a futile one. 5.5.1 Transcription Unit 91 A transcription unit in DNA is defined primarily by the three regions in the DNA: (i) A Promoter (ii) The Structural gene (iii) A Terminator 2024-25 BIOLOGY There is a convention in defining the two strands of the DNA in the structural gene of a transcription unit.  Since the two strands have opposite polarity and the DNA-dependent RNA polymerase also catalyse the polymerisation in only one direction, that is, 5'→3' , the strand that has the polarity 3'→5'  acts as a template, and is also referred to as template strand. The other strand which has the polarity (5'→3' ) and the sequence same as RNA (except thymine at the place of uracil), is displaced during transcription.  Strangely, this strand (which does not code for anything) is referred to as coding strand.  All the reference point while defining a transcription unit is made with coding strand. To explain the point, a hypothetical sequence from a transcription unit is represented below: 3'-ATGCATGCATGCATGCATGCATGC-5'    Template Strand 5'-TACGTACGTACGTACGTACGTACG-3'    Coding Strand Can you now write the sequence of RNA transcribed from the above DNA? Figure 5.9 Schematic structure of a transcription unit The promoter and terminator flank the structural gene in a transcription unit.  The promoter is said to be located towards 5'-end (upstream) of the structural gene (the reference is made with respect to the polarity of coding strand).  It is a DNA sequence that provides binding site for RNA polymerase, and it is the presence of a promoter in a transcription unit that also defines the template and coding strands.  By switching its position with terminator, the definition of coding and template strands could be reversed. The terminator is located towards 3'-end (downstream) of the coding strand and it usually defines the end of the process of transcription (Figure 5.9). There are additional regulatory sequences that may be present further upstream or downstream to the 92 promoter.  Some of the properties of these sequences shall be discussed while dealing with regulation of gene expression. 5.5.2 Transcription Unit and the Gene A gene is defined as the functional unit of inheritance. Though there is no ambiguity that the genes are located on the DNA, it is difficult to literally 2024-25 MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE define a gene in terms of DNA sequence. The DNA sequence coding for tRNA or rRNA molecule also define a gene. However by defining a cistron as a segment of DNA coding for a polypeptide, the structural gene in a transcription unit could be said as monocistronic (mostly in eukaryotes) or polycistronic (mostly in bacteria or prokaryotes). In eukaryotes, the monocistronic structural genes have interrupted coding sequences – the genes in eukaryotes are split. The coding sequences or expressed sequences are defined as exons. Exons are said to be those sequence that appear in mature or processed RNA.  The exons are interrupted by introns.  Introns or intervening sequences do not appear in mature or processed RNA. The split-gene arrangement further complicates the definition of a gene in terms of a DNA segment. Inheritance of a character is also affected by promoter and regulatory sequences of a structural gene.  Hence, sometime the regulatory sequences are loosely defined as regulatory genes, even though these sequences do not code for any RNA or protein. 5.5.3 Types of RNA and the process of Transcription In bacteria, there are three major types of RNAs: mRNA (messenger RNA), tRNA (transfer RNA), and rRNA (ribosomal RNA).  All three RNAs are needed to synthesise a protein in a cell.  The mRNA provides the template, tRNA brings aminoacids and reads the genetic code, and rRNAs play structural and catalytic role during translation. There is single DNA-dependent RNA polymerase that catalyses transcription of all types of RNA in bacteria. RNA polymerase binds to promoter and initiates transcription (Initiation). It uses nucleoside triphosphates as substrate 93 Figure 5.10 Process of Transcription in Bacteria 2024-25 BIOLOGY and polymerises in a template depended fashion following the rule of complementarity.  It somehow also facilitates opening of the helix and continues elongation.  Only a short stretch of RNA remains bound to the enzyme. Once the polymerases reaches the terminator region, the nascent RNA falls off, so also the RNA polymerase.  This results in termination of transcription. An intriguing question is that how is the RNA polymerases able to catalyse all the three steps, which are initiation, elongation and termination.  The RNA polymerase is only capable of catalysing the process of elongation.  It associates transiently with initiation-factor (σ) and termination-factor (ρ) to initiate and terminate the transcription, respectively. Association with these factors alter the specificity of the RNA polymerase to either initiate or terminate (Figure 5.10). In bacteria, since the mRNA does not require any processing to become active, and also since transcription and translation take place in the same compartment (there is no separation of cytosol and nucleus in bacteria), many times the translation can begin much before the mRNA is fully transcribed. Consequently, the transcription and translation can be coupled in bacteria. In eukaryotes, there are two additional complexities – (i) There are at least three RNA polymerases in the nucleus (in addition to the RNA polymerase found in the organelles). There is a clear cut division of labour. The RNA polymerase I transcribes rRNAs 94 Figure 5.11 Process of Transcription in Eukaryotes 2024-25 MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE (28S, 18S, and 5.8S), whereas the RNA polymerase III is responsible for transcription of tRNA, 5srRNA, and snRNAs (small nuclear RNAs). The RNA polymerase II transcribes precursor of mRNA, the heterogeneous nuclear RNA (hnRNA). (ii) The second complexity is that the primary transcripts contain both the exons and the introns and are non-functional. Hence, it is subjected to a process called splicing where the introns are removed and exons are joined in a defined order. hnRNA undergoes additional processing called as capping and tailing. In capping an unusual nucleotide (methyl guanosine triphosphate) is added to the 5'-end of hnRNA. In tailing, adenylate residues (200-300) are added at 3'-end in a template independent manner. It is the fully processed hnRNA, now called mRNA, that is transported out of the nucleus for translation (Figure 5.11). The significance of such complexities is now beginning to be understood.  The split-gene arrangements represent probably an ancient feature of the genome.  The presence of introns is reminiscent of antiquity, and the process of splicing represents the dominance of RNA-world.  In recent times, the understanding of RNA and RNA-dependent processes in the living system have assumed more importance. 5.6  GENETIC CODE During replication and transcription a nucleic acid was copied to form another nucleic acid. Hence, these processes are easy to conceptualise on the basis of complementarity. The process of translation requires transfer of genetic information from a polymer of nucleotides to synthesise a polymer of amino acids. Neither does any complementarity exist between nucleotides and amino acids, nor could any be drawn theoretically. There existed ample evidences, though, to support the notion that change in nucleic acids (genetic material) were responsible for change in amino acids in proteins.  This led to the proposition of a genetic code that could direct the sequence of amino acids during synthesis of proteins. If determining the biochemical nature of genetic material and the structure of DNA was very exciting, the proposition and deciphering of genetic code were most challenging. In a very true sense, it required involvement of scientists from several disciplines – physicists, organic chemists, biochemists and geneticists. It was George Gamow, a physicist, who argued that since there are only 4 bases and if they have to code for 20 amino acids, the code should constitute a combination of bases. He 95 suggested that in order to code for all the 20 amino acids, the code should be made up of three nucleotides. This was a very bold proposition, because a permutation combination of 43 (4 × 4 × 4) would generate 64 codons; generating many more codons than required. Providing proof that the codon was a triplet, was a more daunting task. The chemical method developed by Har Gobind Khorana was 2024-25 BIOLOGY instrumental in synthesising RNA molecules with defined combinations of bases (homopolymers and copolymers). Marshall Nirenberg’s cell-free system for protein synthesis finally helped the code to be deciphered. Severo Ochoa enzyme (polynucleotide phosphorylase) was also helpful in polymerising RNA with defined sequences in a template independent manner (enzymatic synthesis of RNA). Finally a checker-board for genetic code was prepared which is given in Table 5.1. Table 5.1: The Codons for the Various Amino Acids The salient features of genetic code are as follows: (i) The codon is triplet. 61 codons code for amino acids and 3 codons do not code for any amino acids, hence they function as stop codons. (ii) Some amino acids are coded by more than one codon, hence the code is degenerate. (iii) The codon is read in mRNA in a contiguous fashion. There are no punctuations. (iv) The code is nearly universal: for example, from bacteria to human UUU would code for Phenylalanine (phe). Some exceptions to this rule have been found in mitochondrial codons, and in some protozoans. (v) AUG has dual functions. It codes for Methionine (met) , and it 96 also act as initiator codon. (vi) UAA, UAG, UGA are stop terminator codons. If following is the sequence of nucleotides in mRNA, predict the sequence of amino acid coded by it (take help of the checkerboard): -AUG UUU UUC UUC UUU UUU UUC- 2024-25 MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE Now try the opposite.  Following is the sequence of amino acids coded by an mRNA. Predict the nucleotide sequence in the RNA: Met-Phe-Phe-Phe-Phe-Phe-Phe Do you face any difficulty in predicting the opposite? Can you now correlate which two properties of genetic code you have learnt? 5.6.1 Mutations and Genetic Code The relationships between genes and DNA are best understood by mutation studies. You have studied about mutation and its effect in Chapter  4.  Effects of large deletions and rearrangements in a segment of DNA are easy to comprehend.  It may result in loss or gain of a gene and so a function.  The effect of point mutations will be explained here.  A classical example of point mutation is a change of single base pair in the gene for beta globin chain that results in the change of amino acid residue glutamate to valine. It results into a diseased condition called as sickle cell anemia. Effect of point mutations that inserts or deletes a base in structural gene can be better understood by following simple example. Consider a statement that is made up of the following words each having three letters like genetic code. RAM  HAS  RED  CAP If we insert a letter B in between HAS and RED and rearrange the statement, it would read as follows: RAM  HAS  BRE  DCA  P Similarly, if we now insert two letters at the same place, say BI'. Now it would read, RAM  HAS  BIR  EDC  AP Now we insert three letters together, say BIG, the statement would read RAM  HAS  BIG  RED  CAP The same exercise can be repeated, by deleting the letters R, E and D, one by one and rearranging the statement to make a triplet word. RAM  HAS  EDC  AP 97 RAM  HAS  DCA  P RAM  HAS  CAP The conclusion from the above exercise is very obvious. Insertion or deletion of one or two bases changes the reading frame from the point of insertion or deletion. However, such mutations are referred to as 2024-25 BIOLOGY frameshift insertion or deletion mutations. Insertion or deletion of three or its multiple bases insert or delete in one or multiple codon hence one or multiple amino acids, and reading frame remains unaltered from that point onwards. 5.6.2 tRNA– the Adapter Molecule From the very beginning of the proposition of code, it was clear to Francis Crick that there has to be a mechanism to read the code and also to link it to the amino acids, because amino acids have no structural specialities to read the code uniquely.  He postulated the presence of an adapter molecule that would on one hand read the code and on other hand would bind to specific amino acids. The tRNA, then called sRNA (soluble RNA), was known before the genetic code was postulated. However, its role as an adapter molecule was assigned much later. tRNA has an anticodon loop that has bases complementary to the code, and it also has an amino acid acceptor  end to which it binds to amino acids. tRNAs are specific for each amino acid (Figure 5.12).  For Figure 5.12 tRNA - the adapter molecule initiation, there is another specific tRNA that is referred to as initiator tRNA. There are no tRNAs for stop codons.  In figure 5.12, the secondary structure of tRNA has been depicted that looks like a clover-leaf. In actual structure, the tRNA is a compact molecule which looks like inverted L. 5.7  TRANSLATION Translation refers to the process of polymerisation of amino acids to form a polypeptide (Figure 5.13). The order and sequence of amino acids are defined by the sequence of bases in the mRNA. The amino acids are joined by a bond which is known as a peptide bond.  Formation of a peptide bond requires energy.  Therefore, in the first phase itself amino 98 acids are activated in the presence of ATP and linked to their cognate tRNA –a process commonly called as charging of tRNA or aminoacylation of tRNA to be more specific.  If two such charged tRNAs are brought close enough, the formation of peptide bond between them 2024-25 MOLECULAR BASIS OF INHERITANCE