BEFORE YOU READ Gavin Maxwell lives in a cottage in Camusfearna, in the West Highlands in Scotland. When his dog Jonnie died, Maxwell was too sad to think of keeping a dog again. But life without a pet was lonely... Read what happened then, in Maxwell’s own words. Activity 1. Do you have a pet? If you do, you perhaps know that a pet is a serious responsibility. Read in the box below what the SPCA — the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals — has to say about how to care for a pet. Owning a pet is a lifetime of commitment (up to ten years or more if you own a dog or a cat) involving considerable responsibility. The decision to acquire one, therefore, should be made by the whole family. Without full agreement by everyone, the pet could end up unwanted. Puppies and kittens are so adorable, it is easy to understand why adults and children alike would be attracted to them. Unfortunately their cute looks are often a disadvantage, because people purchase them without consideration and the knowledge on how to take proper care of them. The basic points you should keep in mind before adopting a puppy are: • an annual dog licence in accordance with government regulations • its annual vaccination against major diseases • toilet training • regular grooming and bathing • obedience training • don’t forget you should feed your pet a balanced diet • socialisation (many dogs are kept confined in cages or tied up to stop them from dirtying the garden or from chewing on shoes — this is wrong) is very important • a daily dose of exercise, affection and play. Reprint 2024-25 Reading up on the subject beforehand is another important requirement and will guide you towards being a responsible pet owner. Selected pet shops and major book stores provide books on the care of various breeds/pets. 2. Imagine someone has gifted you a pet. With your partner’s help, make a list of the things you need to know about the pet in order to take good care of it. One has been done for you. (i) The food it eats. (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) 3. Otters are found in large numbers in the marshes (i.e. wet areas near lakes, rivers or seas) near Basra, a town in Iraq. Imagine you wanted to bring an otter from Iraq to London, as a pet. What special arrangements would you need to make for your pet otter? You would need to find a place 81 with lots of water, for example. What other points should you think about? The information about Iraq and London given below may help you. Iraq London Iraq has mostly broad plains London has a large and marshes along the population and is a very busy Iranian border in the south, city. In addition to multiwith large flooded areas. A storeyed buildings, however, large part of Iraq’s land area it has many open spaces or is desert, so it has cool parks. It has a temperate winters and dry, hot and climate (i.e. it is neither very cloudless summers. The hot, nor very cold), with mountain areas near Iran regular but generally light and Turkey have cold winters. rainfall or snow throughout There is heavy snowfall there, the year. The warmest month and when the snow melts in is July, and the coolest spring, it causes floods in month is January. February central and southern Iraq. is the driest month. Snow is not very common in London. Reprint 2024-25 Mijbil the Otter I EARLY in the New Year of 1956 I travelled to Southern Iraq. By then it had crossed my mind that I should crossed my mind like to keep an otter instead of a dog, and that (a thought) came into my mind Camusfearna, ringed by water a stone’s throw from its door, would be an eminently suitable spot for a stone's throw this experiment. a very short distance When I casually mentioned this to a friend, he as casually replied that I had better get one in the Tigris marshes, for there they were as common as mosquitoes, and were often tamed by the Arabs. We were going to Basra to the Consulate-General to collect and answer our mail from Europe. At the Consulate-General we found that my friend’s mail had arrived but that mine had not. I cabled to England, and when, three days later, cabled nothing had happened, I tried to telephone. The call sent a message by had to be booked twenty-four hours in advance. On telegraph the first day the line was out of order; on the second the exchange was closed for a religious holiday. On the third day there was another breakdown. My 82 friend left, and I arranged to meet him in a week’s time. Five days later, my mail arrived. I carried it to my bedroom to read, and there, squatting on the floor, were two Arabs; beside them lay a sack that squirmed from time to time. They squirmed handed me a note from my friend: “Here is your otter...” twisted about II With the opening of that sack began a phase of my thraldom (old life that has not yet ended, and may, for all I know, fashioned) not end before I do. It is, in effect, a thraldom to being under the control of otters, an otter fixation, that I have since found to be shared by most other people, who have ever fixation a very strong owned one. attachment or feeling The creature that emerged from this sack on to medievallythe spacious tiled floor of the Consulate bedroom conceived resembled most of all a very small, medievally- an imagination of conceived, dragon. From the head to the tip of the the Middle Ages Reprint 2024-25 First Flight tail he was coated with symmetrical pointed scales of mud armour, between whose tips was visible a soft velvet fur like that of a chocolate-brown mole. He shook himself, and I half expected a cloud of dust, but in fact it was not for another month that I managed to remove the last of the mud and see the otter, as it were, in his true colours. Mijbil, as I called the otter, was, in fact, of a race previously unknown to science, and was at length christened by zoologists Lutrogale perspicillata christened maxwelli, or Maxwell’s otter. For the first twenty- named four hours Mijbil was neither hostile nor friendly; hostile he was simply aloof and indifferent, choosing to unfriendly sleep on the floor as far from my bed as possible. aloof and The second night Mijbil came on to my bed in the indifferent small hours and remained asleep in the crook of keeping a distance my knees until the servant brought tea in the morning, and during the day he began to lose his apathy and take a keen, much too keen, interest in apathy his surroundings. I made a body-belt for him and absence of interest took him on a lead to the bathroom, where for half 83 an hour he went wild with joy in the water, plunging and rolling in it, shooting up and down the length of the bathtub underwater, and making enough slosh and splash for a hippo. This, I was to learn, is a characteristic of otters; every drop of water must be, so to speak, extended and spread about the so to speak place; a bowl must at once be overturned, or, if it as it were (one could will not be overturned, be sat in and sploshed in say this) until it overflows. Water must be kept on the move provoking and made to do things; when static it is wasted causing anger or and provoking. some other reaction Reprint 2024-25 Mijbil the Otter Two days later, Mijbil escaped from my bedroom as I entered it, and I turned to see his tail disappearing round the bend of the corridor that led to the bathroom. By the time I got there he was up on the end of the bathtub and fumbling at the fumbling chromium taps with his paws. I watched, amazed; trying to do in less than a minute he had turned the tap far something in a clumsy manner enough to produce a trickle of water, and after a moment or two achieved the full flow. (He had been lucky to turn the tap the right way; on later occasions he would sometimes screw it up still tighter, chittering with irritation and disappointment at the tap’s failure to cooperate.) Very soon Mij would follow me without a lead and come to me when I called his name. He spent most of his time in play. He spent hours shuffling a rubber ball round the room like a four-footed soccer player using all four feet to dribble the ball, and he could also throw it, with a powerful flick of the flick neck, to a surprising height and distance. But the a quick, light real play of an otter is when he lies on his back movement and juggles with small objects between his paws. 84 Marbles were Mij’s favourite toys for this pastime: he would lie on his back rolling two or more of them up and down his wide, flat belly without ever dropping one to the floor. Oral Comprehension Check 1. What ‘experiment’ did Maxwell think Camusfearna would be suitable for? 2. Why does he go to Basra? How long does he wait there, and why? 3. How does he get the otter? Does he like it? Pick out the words that tell you this. 4. Why was the otter named ‘Maxwell’s otter’? 5. Tick the right answer. In the beginning, the otter was • aloof and indifferent • friendly • hostile 6. What happened when Maxwell took Mijbil to the bathroom?  What did it do two days after that? Reprint 2024-25 First Flight III The days passed peacefully at Basra, but I dreaded dreaded the the prospect of transporting Mij to England, and to prospect Camusfearna. The British airline to London would was in great fear of something that not fly animals, so I booked a flight to Paris on would happen in the another airline, and from there to London. The future airline insisted that Mij should be packed into a box not more than eighteen inches square, to be carried on the floor at my feet. I had a box made, and an hour before we started, I put Mij into the box so that he would become accustomed to it, and left for a hurried meal. When I returned, there was an appalling an appalling spectacle. There was complete silence from the box, spectacle but from its airholes and chinks around the lid, a shocking scene blood had trickled and dried. I whipped off the lock whipped off and tore open the lid, and Mij, exhausted and blood- quickly took off spattered, whimpered and caught at my leg. He had torn the lining of the box to shreds; when I removed the last of it so that there were no cutting edges 85 left, it was just ten minutes until the time of the flight, and the airport was five miles distant. I put the miserable Mij back into the box, holding down the lid with my hand. I sat in the back of the car with the box beside me as the driver tore through the streets of Basra like a ricochetting bullet. The aircraft was waiting ricochetting bullet to take off; I was rushed through to it by infuriated a bullet which changes direction officials. Luckily, the seat booked for me was at after hitting a surface the extreme front. I covered the floor around my infuriated feet with newspapers, rang for the air hostess, very angry and gave her a parcel of fish (for Mij) to keep in a cool place. I took her into my confidence about the took her into my events of the last half hour. I have retained the confidence most profound admiration for that air hostess; she here, shared with her my experiences was the very queen of her kind. She suggested or secrets that I might prefer to have my pet on my knee, and I could have kissed her hand in the depth of my gratitude. But, not knowing otters, I was quite unprepared for what followed. Reprint 2024-25 Mijbil the Otter Mij was out of the box in a flash. He disappeared 86 at high speed down the aircraft. There were squawks and shrieks, and a woman stood up on her seat screaming out, “A rat! A rat!” I caught sight of Mij’s tail disappearing beneath the legs of a portly white- portly turbaned Indian. Diving for it, I missed, but found stout my face covered in curry. “Perhaps,” said the air hostess with the most charming smile, “it would be better if you resumed your seat, and I will find the animal and bring it to you.” I returned to my seat. I was craning my neck bounded on to trying to follow the hunt when suddenly I heard climbed up quickly from my feet a distressed chitter of recognition and nuzzle welcome, and Mij bounded on to my knee and began to rub gently with to nuzzle my face and my neck. the nose Oral Comprehension Check 1. How was Mij to be transported to England? 2. What did Mij do to the box? Reprint 2024-25 First Flight 3. Why did Maxwell put the otter back in the box?  How do you think he felt when he did this? 4. Why does Maxwell say the airhostess was “the very queen of her kind”? 5. What happened when the box was opened? IV After an eventful journey, Maxwell and his otter reach London, where he has a flat. Mij and I remained in London for nearly a month. He would play for hours with a selection of toys, ping-pong balls, marbles, rubber fruit, and a terrapin shell that I had brought back from his native terrapin shell marshes. With the ping-pong ball he invented a the shell of small game of his own which could keep him engrossed turtle found in North America for up to half an hour at a time. A suitcase that I had taken to Iraq had become damaged on the engrossed completely journey home, so that the lid, when closed, interested in remained at a slope from one end to the other. Mij discovered that if he placed the ball on the high 87 end it would run down the length of the suitcase. He would dash around to the other end to ambush ambush its arrival, hide from it, crouching, to spring up to attack suddenly and take it by surprise, grab it and trot off with it from a hidden position to the high end once more. Outside the house I exercised him on a lead, precisely as if he had been a dog. Mij quickly developed certain compulsive habits on these walks in the compulsive habits London streets, like the rituals of children who on habits impossible to control their way to and from school must place their feet squarely on the centre of each paving block; must touch every seventh upright of the iron railings, or upright pass to the outside of every second lamp post. Opposite (here) post or rod to my flat was a single-storied primary school, along placed straight up whose frontage ran a low wall some two feet high. On his way home, but never on his way out, Mij would distraction something that tug me to this wall, jump on to it, and gallop the full takes away one’s length of its thirty yards, to the hopeless distraction attention from what both of pupils and of staff within. one is doing Reprint 2024-25 Mijbil the Otter It is not, I suppose, in any way strange that the average Londoner should not recognise an otter, but the variety of guesses as to what kind of animal this might be came as a surprise to me. Otters belong to a comparatively small group of animals called Mustellines, shared by the badger, mongoose, weasel, stoat, mink and others. I faced a continuous barrage barrage of of conjectural questions that sprayed all the conjectural Mustellines but the otter; more random guesses hit questions a stream of on ‘a baby seal’ and ‘a squirrel.’ ‘Is that a walrus, questions filled with mister?’ reduced me to giggles, and outside a dog guesses show I heard ‘a hippo’. A beaver, a bear cub, a leopard — one, apparently, that had changed its spots — and a ‘brontosaur’; Mij was anything but an otter. But the question for which I awarded the highest score came from a labourer digging a hole in the street. I was still far from him when he laid down his tool, put his hands on his hips, and began to stare. As I drew nearer I saw his expression of surprise and affront, as though he would have me know that he was not one upon whom to play jokes. I came abreast of him; he spat, glared, and then growled out, “Here, 88 Mister — what is that supposed to be?” Oral Comprehension Check 1. What game had Mij invented? 2. What are ‘compulsive habits’?  What does Maxwell say are the compulsive habits of (i) school children (ii) Mij? 3. What group of animals do otters belong to? 4. What guesses did the Londoners make about what Mij was? 1. What things does Mij do which tell you that he is an intelligent, friendly and fun-loving animal who needs love? 2. What are some of the things we come to know about otters from this text? 3. Why is Mij’s species now known to the world as Maxwell’s otter? Reprint 2024-25 First Flight 4. Maxwell in the story speaks for the otter, Mij. He tells us what the otter feels and thinks on different occasions. Given below are some things the otter does. Complete the column on the right to say what Maxwell says about what Mij feels and thinks. What Mij does How Mij feels or thinks plunges, rolls in the water and makes the water splosh and splash Screws the tap in the wrong way Nuzzles Maxwell’s face and neck in the aeroplane 5. Read the story and find the sentences where Maxwell describes his pet otter. Then choose and arrange your sentences to illustrate those statements below that you think are true. Maxwell’s description (i) makes Mij seem almost human, like a small boy. (ii) shows that he is often irritated with what Mij does. (iii) shows that he is often surprised by what Mij does. (iv) of Mij’s antics is comical. 89 (v) shows that he observes the antics of Mij very carefully. (vi) shows that he thinks Mij is a very ordinary otter. (vii) shows that he thinks the otter is very unusual. I. Describing a Repeated Action in the Past To talk about something that happened regularly in the past, but does not happen any longer, we use would or used to. Both would and used to can describe repeated actions in the past. (a) Mij would follow me without a lead and come to me when I called his name. (b) He would play for hours with a selection of toys. (c) On his way home… Mij would tug me to this wall. (d) When I was five years old, I used to follow my brother all over the place. (e) He used to tease me when Mother was not around. To describe repeated states or situations in the past, however, we use only used to. (We cannot use would for states or situations in the past.) So we do Reprint 2024-25 Mijbil the Otter not use would with verbs like be, have, believe, etc. Look at the following sentences. (a) When we were young, we used to believe there were ghosts in school. (Note: believe shows a state of mind.) (b) Thirty years ago, more women used to be housewives than now. (Note: be here describes a situation.) From the table below, make as many correct sentences as you can using would and/or used to, as appropriate. (Hint: First decide whether the words in italics show an action, or a state or situation, in the past.) Then add two or three sentences of your own to it. Emperor Akbar be fond of musical evenings. Every evening we would take long walks on the beach. Fifty years ago, very few people own cars. Till the 1980s, Shanghai used to have very dirty streets. My uncle spend his holidays by the sea. II. Noun Modifiers To describe or give more information about a noun (or to modify a noun), we use adjectives or adjectival phrases. Look at these examples from the text: (a) An eminently suitable spot (c) Symmetrical pointed scales 90 (b) His wide, flat belly (d) A ricocheting bullet Nouns can also be used as modifiers: (a) The dinner party (b) A designer dress (c) The car keys We can use more than one noun as modifier. Proper nouns can also be used: (a) The Christmas dinner party (b) A silk designer dress (c) The Maruti car keys In the examples below, there is an adjectival phrase in front of a noun modifier: (a) The lovely Christmas party (b) A trendy silk designer dress (c) The frightfully expensive golden Maruti car keys 1. Look at these examples from the text, and say whether the modifiers (in italics) are nouns, proper nouns, or adjective plus noun. (i) An otter fixation (iv) The London streets (ii) The iron railings (v) soft velvet fur (iii) The Tigris marshes (vi) A four-footed soccer player Reprint 2024-25 First Flight 2. Given below are some nouns, and a set of modifiers (in the box). Combine the nouns and modifiers to make as many appropriate phrases as you can. (Hint: The nouns and modifiers are all from the texts in this book.) temple girls triangle dresses person thoughts boys roar gifts scream farewell expression time subject landscape handkerchief crossing flight chatterbox profession physique coffee view celebration college rough hundred stone ordinary love uncomfortable white slang slack bare railroad termendous family marriage plump invigorating panoramic heartbreaking birthday incorrigible ridiculous loud first three III. Read this sentence: He shook himself, and I half expected a cloud of dust. The author uses a cloud of dust to give a picture of a large quantity of dust. Phrases like this indicate a particular quantity of something that is not 91 usually countable. For example:  a bit of land, a drop of blood, a pinch of salt, a piece of paper. 1. Match the words on the left with a word on the right. Some words on the left can go with more than one word on the right. (i) a portion of – blood (ii) a pool of – cotton (iii) flakes of – stones (iv) a huge heap of – gold (v) a gust of – fried fish (vi) little drops of – snow (vii) a piece of – water (viii) a pot of – wind 2. Use a bit of/a piece of/a bunch of/a cloud of/a lump of with the italicised nouns in the following sentences. The first has been done for you as an example. (i) My teacher gave me some My teacher gave me a bit of advice. advice. (ii) Can you give me some clay, please. Reprint 2024-25 Mijbil the Otter (iii) The information you gave was very useful. (iv) Because of these factories, smoke hangs over the city. (v) Two stones rubbed together can produce sparks of fire. (vi) He gave me some flowers on my birthday. You have seen how Maxwell describes Mij the otter’s feelings and thoughts by watching him. Play the game of dumb charades. Take turns to express a feeling or thought silently, through gestures. Let the class speak out their guesses about the feelings or thoughts you are trying to express. Write a description of a person or an animal (such as a pet) that you know very well and love very much. Questions (4) and (5) in ‘Thinking about the Text’ will have given you some idea about how to do this. Mention some things the person or animal does, what you think the person or animal feels, etc. 92 WHAT WE HAVE DONE Narrated a story about an interesting and unusual pet. WHAT YOU CAN DO 1. The events narrated in this text took place over half-a-century ago. Discuss with your class what changes have taken place over these years in (i) what animals we can keep as pets (some species are protected under the laws for wildlife preservation) (ii) the laws for exporting and importing or trading in animals (iii) rules for transporting goods, pets, etc. on aircraft. The class might wish to do their own research on these questions and report their findings in class. 2. Ask students if they know of other examples of unusual pets or of wild animals which are trained to work for or amuse humans (eg dancing bears, lions and tigers in a circus, elephants trained to work or take part in ceremonies). Then lead students into a discussion about the ethics of keeping wild animals as pets: What are the difficulties these may entail? According to the students, what will the animal miss most when it is taken away from its natural habitat? Do they think that it is ‘cute’ to see Mij the otter on a leash? Get them to look at the situation from all points of view. 3. Visit the website wwf.org.uk/core/wildlife to know more about  otters and otter conservation projects. Reprint 2024-25 First Flight Fog The fog comes on little cat feet. It sits looking over harbour and city on silent haunches and then moves on. CARL SANDBURG on haunches: sitting with knees bent 1. (i) What does Sandburg think the fog is like? (ii) How does the fog come? (iii) What does ‘it’ in the third line refer to? (iv) Does the poet actually say that the fog is like a cat? Find three things that tell us that the fog is like a cat. 2. You know that a metaphor compares two things by transferring a feature of one thing to the other (See Unit 1). (i) Find metaphors for the following words and complete the table below. Also try to say how they are alike. The first is done for you. Storm tiger pounces over the fields, growls Train Fire School Home (ii) Think about a storm. Try to visualise the force of the storm, hear the sound of the storm, feel the power of the storm and the sudden calm that happens afterwards. Write a poem about the storm comparing it with an animal. 3. Does this poem have a rhyme scheme? Poetry that does not have an obvious rhythm or rhyme is called ‘free verse’. Reprint 2024-25