SECTION II LIVELIHOODS, ECONOMIES AND SOCIETIES 2024-25 2024-25 The Making of a Global World 1  The Pre-modern World When we talk of ‘globalisation’ we often refer to an economic system that has emerged since the last 50 years or so. But as you will see in this chapter, the making of the global world has a long history – of trade, of migration, of people in search of work, the movement of capital, and much else. As we think about the dramatic and visible signs of  global interconnectedness in our lives today, we need to understand the phases through which this world in which we live has emerged. All through history, human societies have become steadily more interlinked. From ancient times, travellers, traders, priests and pilgrims travelled vast distances for knowledge, opportunity and spiritual fulfilment, or to escape persecution. They carried goods, money, values, skills, ideas, inventions, and even germs and diseases. As early as 3000 BCE an active coastal trade linked the Indus valley civilisations with present-day West Asia. For more than a millennia, cowries (the Hindi cowdi or seashells, used as a form of  currency) from the Maldives found their way to China and East Africa. The long-distance spread of  disease-carrying germs may be traced as far back as the seventh century. By the thirteenth century it had become an unmistakable link. Fig. 1 – Image of a ship on a memorial stone, Goa Museum, tenth century CE. From the ninth century, images of ships appear regularly in memorial stones found in the western coast, indicating the significance of oceanic trade. 53 2024-25 The Making of a Global World The  Making  of  a  Global  World Chapter III 1.1 Silk Routes Link the World The silk routes are a good example of vibrant pre-modern trade and cultural links between distant parts of the world. The name ‘silk routes’ points to the importance of  West-bound Chinese silk cargoes along this route. Historians have identified several silk routes, over land and by sea, knitting together vast regions of Asia, and linking Asia with Europe and northern Africa. They are known to have existed since before the Christian Era and thrived almost till the fifteenth century. But Chinese pottery also travelled the same route, as did textiles and spices from India and Southeast Asia. In return, precious metals – gold and silver – flowed from Europe to Asia. Fig. 2 – Silk route trade as depicted in a Trade and cultural exchange always went hand in hand. Early Chinese cave painting, eighth century, Cave Christian missionaries almost certainly travelled this route to Asia, as 217, Mogao Grottoes, Gansu, China. did early Muslim preachers a few centuries later. Much before all this, Buddhism emerged from eastern India and spread in several directions through intersecting points on the silk routes. 1.2 Food Travels: Spaghetti and Potato Food offers many examples of  long-distance cultural exchange. Traders and travellers introduced new crops to the lands they travelled. Even ‘ready’ foodstuff  in distant parts of the world might share common origins. Take spaghetti and noodles. It is believed that noodles travelled west from China to become spaghetti. Or, perhaps Arab traders took pasta to fifth-century Sicily, an island now in Italy. Similar foods were also known in India and Japan, so the truth about their origins may never be known. Yet such guesswork suggests the possibilities of long-distance cultural contact even in the pre-modern world. Many of our common foods such as potatoes, soya, groundnuts, maize, tomatoes, chillies, sweet potatoes, and so on were not known to our ancestors until about five centuries ago. These foods were only introduced in Europe and Asia after Christopher Columbus accidentally discovered the vast continent that Fig. 3 – Merchants from Venice and the Orient exchanging goods, would later become known as the Americas. from Marco Polo, Book of Marvels, fifteenth century. 54 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World (Here we will use ‘America’ to describe North America, South America and the Caribbean.) In fact, many of our common foods came from America’s original inhabitants – the American Indians. Sometimes the new crops could make the difference between life and death. Europe’s poor began to eat better and live longer with the introduction of  the humble potato. Ireland’s poorest peasants became so dependent on potatoes that when disease destroyed the potato crop in the mid-1840s, hundreds of thousands died of  starvation. 1.3 Conquest, Disease and Trade The pre-modern world shrank greatly in the sixteenth century after European sailors found a sea route to Asia and also successfully crossed the western ocean to America. For centuries before, the Indian Ocean had known a bustling trade, with goods, people, knowledge, customs, etc. criss-crossing its waters. The Indian subcontinent was central to these flows and a crucial point in their networks.  The entry of  the Europeans helped expand or redirect some of these flows towards Europe. Before its ‘discovery’, America had been cut off from regular contact Fig. 4 –  The Irish Potato Famine, Illustrated with the rest of  the world for millions of  years. But from the sixteenth London News, 1849. Hungry children digging for potatoes in a field that century, its vast lands and abundant crops and minerals began to has already been harvested, hoping to discover transform trade and lives everywhere. some leftovers. During the Great Irish Potato Famine (1845 to 1849), around 1,000,000 Precious metals, particularly silver, from mines located in present- people died of starvation in Ireland, and double the number emigrated in search of work. day Peru and Mexico also enhanced Europe’s wealth and financed its trade with Asia. Legends spread in seventeenth-century Europe about South America’s fabled wealth. Many expeditions set off  in search of  El Dorado, the fabled city of  gold. The Portuguese and Spanish conquest and colonisation of  America was decisively under way by the mid-sixteenth century.  European Box 1 conquest was not just a result of  superior firepower. In fact, the ‘Biological’ warfare? most powerful weapon of the Spanish conquerors was not a John Winthorp, the first governor of  the conventional military weapon at all. It was the germs such as those Massachusetts Bay colony in New England, of smallpox that they carried on their person. Because of their long wrote in May 1634 that smallpox signalled God’s isolation, America’s original inhabitants had no immunity against blessing for the colonists: ‘… the natives … were neere (near) all dead of small Poxe (pox), so as these diseases that came from Europe. Smallpox in particular proved the Lord hathe (had) cleared our title to what a deadly killer. Once introduced, it spread deep into the continent, we possess’. ahead even of any Europeans reaching there. It killed and decimated Alfred Crosby, Ecological Imperialism. whole communities, paving the way for conquest. 55 2024-25 The  Making  of  a  Global  World Guns could be bought or captured and turned against the invaders. New words But not diseases such as smallpox to which the conquerors were Dissenter – One who refuses to accept mostly immune. established beliefs and practices Until the nineteenth century, poverty and hunger were common in Europe. Cities were crowded and deadly diseases were widespread. Religious conflicts were common, and religious dissenters were persecuted. Thousands therefore fled Europe for America. Here, by the eighteenth century, plantations worked by slaves captured in Africa were growing cotton and sugar for European markets. Until well into the eighteenth century, China and India were among the world’s richest countries. They were also pre-eminent in Asian trade. However, from the fifteenth century, China is said to have Discuss restricted overseas contacts and retreated into isolation.  China’s Explain what we mean when we say that the reduced role and the rising importance of the Americas gradually world ‘shrank’ in the 1500s. moved the centre of  world trade westwards. Europe now emerged as the centre of  world trade. Fig. 5 – Slaves for sale, New Orleans, Illustrated London News, 1851. A prospective buyer carefully inspecting slaves lined up before the auction. You can see two children along with four women and seven men in top hats and suit waiting to be sold. To attract buyers, slaves were often dressed in their best clothes. 56 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World 2  The Nineteenth Century (1815-1914) The world changed profoundly in the nineteenth century. Economic, political, social, cultural and technological factors interacted in complex ways to transform societies and reshape external relations. Economists identify three types of movement or ‘flows’ within international economic exchanges. The first is the flow of trade which in the nineteenth century referred largely to trade in goods (e.g., cloth or wheat). The second is the flow of labour – the migration of people in search of employment. The third is the movement of capital for short-term or long-term investments over long distances. All three flows were closely interwoven and affected peoples’ lives more deeply now than ever before. The interconnections could sometimes be broken – for example, labour migration was often more restricted than goods or capital flows. Yet it helps us understand the nineteenth-century world economy better if we look at the three flows together. 2.1 A World Economy Takes Shape A good place to start is the changing pattern of food production and consumption in industrial Europe. Traditionally, countries liked to be self-sufficient in food. But in nineteenth-century Britain, self-sufficiency in food meant lower living standards and social conflict. Why was this so? Population growth from the late eighteenth century had increased the demand for food grains in Britain. As urban centres expanded and industry grew, the demand for agricultural products went up, pushing up food grain prices. Under pressure from landed groups, the government also restricted the import of corn. The laws allowing the government to do this were commonly known as the ‘Corn Laws’. Unhappy with high food prices, industrialists and urban dwellers forced the abolition of  the Corn Laws. After the Corn Laws were scrapped, food could be imported into Britain more cheaply than it could be produced within the country. British agriculture was unable to compete with imports.  Vast areas of land were now left uncultivated, and thousands of men and women were thrown out of work. They flocked to the cities or migrated overseas. 57 2024-25 The  Making  of  a  Global  World As food prices fell, consumption in Britain rose. From the midnineteenth century, faster industrial growth in Britain also led to higher incomes, and therefore more food imports. Around the world – in Eastern Europe, Russia, America and Australia  –  lands were cleared and food production expanded to meet the British demand. It was not enough merely to clear lands for agriculture. Railways were needed to link the agricultural regions to the ports. New harbours had to be built and old ones expanded to ship the new cargoes. People had to settle on the lands to bring them under cultivation. This meant building homes and settlements. All these activities in turn required capital and labour. Capital flowed from financial centres such as London. The demand for labour in places where labour was in short supply – as in America and Australia – led to more migration. Nearly 50 million people emigrated from Europe to America and Australia in the nineteenth century. All over the world some 150 million are estimated to have left their homes, crossed oceans and vast distances over land in search of a better future. Fig. 6 – Emigrant ship leaving for the US, by M.W. Ridley, 1869. Fig. 7 – Irish emigrants waiting to board the ship, by  Michael Fitzgerald, 1874. 58 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World Thus by 1890, a global agricultural economy had taken shape, Activity accompanied by complex changes in labour movement patterns, capital flows, ecologies and technology. Food no longer came from Prepare a flow chart to show how Britain’s a nearby village or town, but from thousands of  miles away. It was decision to import food led to increased migration to America and Australia. not grown by a peasant tilling his own land, but by an agricultural worker, perhaps recently arrived, who was now working on a large farm that only a generation ago had most likely been a forest. It was transported by railway, built for that very purpose, and by ships which were increasingly manned in these decades by low-paid workers from southern Europe, Asia, Africa and the Caribbean. Activity Imagine that you are an agricultural worker who has arrived in America from Ireland. Write a paragraph on why you chose to come and how you are earning your living. Some of this dramatic change, though on a smaller scale, occurred closer home in west Punjab. Here the British Indian government built a network of  irrigation canals to transform semi-desert wastes into fertile agricultural lands that could grow wheat and cotton for export. The Canal Colonies, as the areas irrigated by the new canals were called, were settled by peasants from other parts of  Punjab. Of course, food is merely an example. A similar story can be told for cotton, the cultivation of which expanded worldwide to feed British textile mills. Or rubber. Indeed, so rapidly did regional specialisation in the production of  commodities develop, that between 1820 and 1914 world trade is estimated to have multiplied 25 to 40 times. Nearly 60 per cent of  this trade comprised ‘primary products’ – that is, agricultural products such as wheat and cotton, and minerals such as coal. 2.2 Role of Technology What was the role of  technology in all this? The railways, steamships, the telegraph, for example, were important inventions without which we cannot imagine the transformed nineteenth-century world. But technological advances were often the result of larger social, political and economic factors. For example, colonisation stimulated new investments and improvements in transport: faster railways, lighter wagons and larger ships helped move food more cheaply and quickly from faraway farms to final markets. 59 2024-25 The  Making  of  a  Global  World Fig. 8 — The Smithfield Club Cattle Show, Illustrated London News, 1851. Cattle were traded at fairs, brought by farmers for sale. One of the oldest livestock markets in London was at Smithfield. In the mid- nineteenth century a huge poultry and meat market was established near the railway line connecting Smithfield to all the meat-supplying centres of the country. The trade in meat offers a good example of  this connected process. Till the 1870s, animals were shipped live from America to Europe and then slaughtered when they arrived there. But live animals took up a lot of ship space. Many also died in voyage, fell ill, lost weight, or became unfit to eat. Meat was hence an expensive luxury beyond the reach of  the European poor. High prices in turn kept demand and production down until the development of  a new technology, namely, refrigerated ships, which enabled the transport of  perishable foods over long distances. Now animals were slaughtered for food at the starting point – in America, Australia or New Zealand – and then transported to Europe as frozen meat. This reduced shipping costs and lowered meat prices in Europe. The poor in Europe could now consume a more varied diet. To the earlier monotony of bread and potatoes many, though not all, could now add meat (and butter and eggs) to their diet. Better living conditions promoted social peace within Fig. 9 – Meat being loaded on to the ship, the country and support for imperialism abroad. Alexandra, Illustrated London News, 1878. Export of meat was possible only after ships were refrigerated. 2.3 Late nineteenth-century Colonialism Trade flourished and markets expanded in the late nineteenth century. But this was not only a period of expanding trade and increased prosperity. It is important to realise that there was a darker side to this process.  In many parts of the world, the expansion of trade and a closer relationship with the world economy also meant a loss of freedoms and livelihoods. Latenineteenth-century European conquests produced many painful economic, social and ecological changes through which the colonised societies were brought into the world economy. 60 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World Look at a map of Africa (Fig. 10). You SPANISH MOROCCO will see some countries’ borders run MEDITERRANEAN SEA TUNISIA straight, as if they were drawn using a MOROCCO SPANISH ALGERIA LIBYA ruler. Well, in fact this was almost how SAHARA (TRIPOLI) EGYPT rival European powers in Africa drew up RIO DE ORO the borders demarcating their respective FRENCH territories. In 1885 the big European FRENCH WEST AFRICA EQUATORIAL ERITREA FRENCH AFRICA ANGLO- SOMALILAND FRENCH SUDAN powers met in Berlin to complete the EGYPTIAN PORT SUDAN NIGERIA BRITISH carving up of Africa between them. GUINEA SOMALILAND ETHIOPIA SIERRA CAMEROONS Britain and France made vast additions to ITALIAN LEONE GOLD TOGO SOMALILAND CONGO BRITISH their overseas territories in the late nineteenth IVORY COAST MIDDLE COAST FREE STATE EAST AFRICA CONGO century. Belgium and Germany became new (BELGIAN CONGO) GERMAN colonial powers. The US also became a ATLANTIC EAST AFRICA OCEAN colonial power in the late 1890s by taking ANGOLA NORTHERN PORTUGUESE over some colonies earlier held by Spain. RHODESIA EAST AFRICA SOUTHERN Let us look at one example of the destructive GERMAN BELGIAN RHODESIA BRITISH SOUTH WEST MADAGASCAR FRENCH impact of colonialism on the economy and AFRICA GERMAN ITALIAN PORTUGUESE livelihoods of colonised people. SPANISH BRITISH DOMINION UNION OF INDEPENDENT STATE SOUTH AFRICA Fig. 10 – Map of colonial Africa at the end of the nineteenth century. Box 2 Sir Henry Morton Stanley in Central Africa Stanley was a journalist and explorer sent by the New York Herald to find Livingston, a missionary and explorer who had been in Africa for several years. Like other European and American explorers of the time, Stanley went with arms, mobilised local hunters, warriors and labourers to help him, fought with local tribes, investigated African terrains, and mapped different regions. These explorations helped the conquest of Africa. Geographical explorations were not driven by an innocent search for scientific information. They were directly linked to imperial projects. Fig. 11 – Sir Henry Morton Stanley and his retinue in Central Africa, Illustrated London News, 1871. 61 2024-25 The  Making  of  a  Global  World RE D S EA 2.4 Rinderpest, or the Cattle Plague In Africa, in the 1890s, a fast-spreading disease of cattle plague or Rinderpest had a terrifying impact on people’s livelihoods and the local economy. This is a good example of the widespread European imperial impact on colonised societies. It shows how in this era of conquest even a disease affecting cattle reshaped the lives and fortunes of thousands of people and their relations with the rest of the world. Historically, Africa had abundant land and a relatively small population. For centuries, land and livestock sustained African Fig. 12 – Transport to the Transvaal gold mines, livelihoods and people rarely worked for a wage. In late- The Graphic, 1887. Crossing the Wilge river was the quickest method of nineteenth-century Africa there were few consumer goods that transport to the gold fields of Transvaal. After the wages could buy. If you had been an African possessing land discovery of gold in Witwatersrand, Europeans rushed to the region despite their fear of disease and and livestock – and there was plenty of both – you too would death, and the difficulties of the journey. By the have seen little reason to work for a wage. 1890s, South Africa contributed over 20 per cent of the world gold production. In the late nineteenth century, Europeans were attracted to Africa due to its vast resources of land and minerals. Europeans came to Africa hoping to establish plantations and mines to produce crops and minerals for export to Europe. But there was an unexpected problem – a shortage of labour willing to work for wages. Employers used many methods to recruit and retain labour. Heavy taxes were imposed which could be paid only by working for wages on plantations and mines. Inheritance laws were changed so that Fig. 13 — Diggers at work in the Transvaal gold fields in South Africa, The Graphic, 1875. 62 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World peasants were displaced from land:  only one member of a family was allowed to inherit land, as a result of which the others were pushed into the labour market. Mineworkers were also confined in compounds and not allowed to move about freely. Then came Rinderpest, a devastating cattle disease. Rinderpest arrived in Africa in the late 1880s.  It was carried by infected cattle imported from British Asia to feed the Italian soldiers invading Eritrea in East Africa. Entering Africa in the east, rinderpest moved west ‘like forest fire’, reaching Africa’s Atlantic coast in 1892. It reached the Cape (Africa’s southernmost tip) five years later. Along the way rinderpest killed 90 per cent of the cattle. The loss of cattle destroyed African livelihoods. Planters, mine owners and colonial governments now successfully monopolised what scarce cattle resources remained, to strengthen their power and to force Africans into the labour market. Control over the scarce resource of cattle enabled European colonisers to conquer and subdue Africa. Similar stories can be told about the impact of Western conquest on other parts of the nineteenth-century world. 2.4 Indentured Labour Migration from India The example of indentured labour migration from India also New words illustrates the two-sided nature of the nineteenth-century world. It was a world of faster economic growth as well as great misery, Indentured labour – A  bonded labourer under higher incomes for some and poverty for others, technological contract to work for an employer for a specific advances in some areas and new forms of coercion in others. amount of time, to pay off his passage to a new country or home In the nineteenth century, hundreds of thousands of Indian and Chinese labourers went to work on plantations, in mines, and in road and railway construction projects around the world. In India, indentured labourers were hired under contracts which promised return travel to India after they had worked five years on their employer’s plantation. Most Indian indentured workers came from the present-day regions of eastern Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, central India and the dry districts of Tamil Nadu. In the mid-nineteenth century these regions experienced many changes – cottage industries declined, land rents rose, lands were cleared for mines and plantations. All this affected the lives of the poor: they failed to pay their rents, became deeply indebted and were forced to migrate in search of work. 63 2024-25 The  Making  of  a  Global  World The main destinations of Indian indentured migrants were the Caribbean islands (mainly Trinidad, Guyana and Surinam), Mauritius and Fiji. Closer home, Tamil migrants went to Ceylon and Malaya. Indentured workers were also recruited for tea plantations in Assam. Recruitment was done by agents engaged by employers and paid a small commission. Many migrants agreed to take up work hoping to escape poverty or oppression in their home villages. Agents also tempted the prospective migrants by providing false information about final destinations, modes of travel, the nature of the Fig. 14 — Indian indentured labourers in a cocoa plantation in work, and living and working conditions. Often Trinidad, early nineteenth century. migrants were not even told that they were to embark on a long sea voyage. Sometimes agents even forcibly abducted less willing migrants. Nineteenth-century indenture has been described as a ‘new system of slavery’. On arrival at the plantations, labourers found conditions Discuss to be different from what they had imagined. Living and working Discuss the importance of language and conditions were harsh, and there were few legal rights. popular traditions in the creation of national But workers discovered their own ways of  surviving. Many of  them identity. escaped into the wilds, though if caught they faced severe punishment. Others developed new forms of  individual and collective selfexpression, blending different cultural forms, old and new. In Trinidad the annual Muharram procession was transformed into a riotous carnival called ‘Hosay’ (for Imam Hussain) in which workers of  all races and religions joined. Similarly, the protest religion of Rastafarianism (made famous by the Jamaican reggae star Bob Marley) is also said to reflect social and cultural links with Indian migrants to the Caribbean. ‘Chutney music’, popular in Trinidad and Guyana, is another creative contemporary expression of the post-indenture experience. These forms of  cultural fusion are part of the making of the global world, where things from different places get mixed, lose their original characteristics and become something entirely new. Most indentured workers stayed on after their contracts ended, or returned to their new homes after a short spell in India. Consequently, Fig. 15 — Indentured laboureres photographed for identification. there are large communities of people of Indian descent in these For the employers, the numbers and not the countries. Have you heard of  the Nobel Prize-winning writer names mattered. 64 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World V.S. Naipaul? Some of you may have followed the exploits of West Indies cricketers Shivnarine Chanderpaul and Ramnaresh Sarwan. If you have wondered why their names sound vaguely Indian, the answer is that they are descended from indentured labour migrants from India. From the 1900s India’s nationalist leaders began opposing the system of indentured labour migration as abusive and cruel. It was abolished in 1921. Yet for a number of decades afterwards, descendants of Indian indentured workers, often thought of as ‘coolies’, remained Fig. 16 — A contract form of an indentured an uneasy minority in the Caribbean islands. Some of Naipaul’s labourer. early novels capture their sense of loss and alienation. 2.5 Indian Entrepreneurs Abroad Source A Growing food and other crops for the world market required The testimony of  an indentured labourer capital. Large plantations could borrow it from banks and Extract from the testimony of Ram Narain markets. But what about the humble peasant? Tewary, an indentured labourer who spent ten years on Demerara in the early twentieth century. Enter the Indian banker. Do you know of the Shikaripuri ‘… in spite of my best efforts, I could not properly Shroffs and Nattukottai  Chettiars? They were amongst the do the works that were allotted to me ... In a many groups of bankers and traders who financed export few days I got my hands bruised all over and I agriculture in Central and Southeast Asia, using either their own could not go to work for a week for which I was funds or those borrowed from European banks. They had a prosecuted and sent to jail for 14 days. ... new emigrants find the tasks allotted to them sophisticated system to transfer money over large distances, and extremely heavy and cannot complete them in even developed indigenous forms of corporate organisation. a day. ... Deductions are also made from wages if the work is considered to have been done Indian traders and moneylenders also followed European unsatisfactorily. Many people cannot therefore colonisers into Africa. Hyderabadi Sindhi traders, however, earn their full wages and are punished in various ventured beyond European colonies. From the 1860s they ways. In fact, the labourers have to spend their period of indenture in great trouble …’ established flourishing emporia at busy ports worldwide, selling local and imported curios to tourists whose numbers were Source: Department of Commerce and Industry, Emigration Branch. 1916 beginning to swell, thanks to the development of safe and Source comfortable passenger vessels. 2.6 Indian Trade, Colonialism and the Global System Historically, fine cottons produced in India were exported  to Europe. With industrialisation, British cotton manufacture began to expand, and industrialists pressurised the government to restrict cotton imports and protect local industries. Tariffs were imposed on cloth imports into Britain. Consequently, the inflow of fine Indian cotton began to decline. From the early nineteenth century, British manufacturers also began to seek overseas markets for their cloth. Excluded from the British 65 2024-25 The  Making  of  a  Global  World Fig. 17 – East India Company House, London. This was the nerve centre of the worldwide operations of the East India Company. market by tariff barriers, Indian textiles now faced stiff competition in other international markets. If  we look at the figures of  exports from India, we see a steady decline of the share of cotton textiles: from some 30 per cent around 1800 to 15 per cent by 1815. By the 1870s this proportion had dropped to below 3 per cent. What, then, did India export? The figures again tell a dramatic story.  While exports of  manufactures declined rapidly, export of raw materials increased equally fast. Between 1812 and 1871, the share of raw cotton exports rose from 5 per cent to 35 per cent. Indigo used for dyeing cloth was another important export for Fig. 18 – A distant view of Surat and its river. All through the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, Surat remained the main centre of overseas trade in the western Indian Ocean. 66 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World many decades. And, as you have read last year, opium shipments to China grew rapidly from the 1820s to become for a while India’s single largest export. Britain grew opium in India and exported it to China and, with the money earned through this sale, it financed its tea and other imports from China. Over the nineteenth century, British manufactures flooded the Indian market. Food grain and raw material exports from India to Britain and the rest of the world increased. But the value of British exports to India was much higher than the value of British imports from India. Thus Britain had a ‘trade surplus’ with India. Britain used this surplus to balance its trade deficits with other countries – that is, with countries from which Britain was importing more than it was selling to. This is how a multilateral settlement system works – it allows one country’s deficit with another country to be settled by its surplus with a third country. By helping Britain balance its deficits,  India played a crucial role in the late-nineteenth-century world economy. Britain’s trade surplus in India also helped pay the so-called ‘home charges’ that included private remittances home by British officials and traders, interest payments on India’s external debt, and pensions of British officials in India. Aleppo Bukhara Yarkand The Great Alexandria Basra P Lahore ersia Hoogly n Bandar Abbas Canton G ulf Muscat Surat Jedda Hanoi Macha Masulipatam Bangkok Madras Goa Acheh Indian Ocean Malacca Mombasa Batavia Bantam Mozambique Sea route Land route Volume of trade passing through the port Fig. 19 – The trade routes that linked India to the world at the end of the seventeenth century. 67 2024-25 Wall The  Making  of  a  Global  World Re d S ea 3  The Inter-war Economy The First World War (1914-18) was mainly fought in Europe. But its impact was felt around the world. Notably for our concerns in this chapter, it plunged the first half of the twentieth century into a crisis that took over three decades to overcome. During this period the world experienced widespread economic and political instability, and another catastrophic war. 3.1 Wartime Transformations