The Age of Industrialisation Fig. 1 –  Dawn of the Century, published by E.T. Paull Music Co., New York, England, 1900. In 1900, a popular music publisher E.T. Paull produced a music book that had a picture on the cover page announcing the ‘Dawn of  the Century’ (Fig. 1). As you can see from the illustration, at the centre of the picture is a goddess-like figure, the angel of progress, bearing the flag of  the new century. She is gently perched on a wheel wTithh wein gAs, sgymebo liosinfg t imIne. Hderu flisghtt ris itaakinlgi shear inttoi othen future. New words Floating about, behind her, are the signs of  progress: railway, camera, machines, printing press and factory. Orient – The countries to the east of the Mediterranean, usually referring to This glorification of  machines and technology is even more marked Asia. The term arises out of  a western in a picture which appeared on the pages of a trade magazine over viewpoint that sees this region as prea hundred years ago (Fig. 2). It shows two magicians. The one at the modern, traditional and mysterious top is Aladdin from the Orient who built a beautiful palace with his 79 2024-25 The  Age  of   Indust r ia l isa t ion Chapter IV The  Age  of  Industrialisation magic lamp. The one at the bottom is the modern mechanic, who with his modern tools weaves a new magic: builds bridges, ships, towers and high-rise buildings. Aladdin is shown as representing the East and the past, the mechanic stands for the West and modernity. These images offer us a triumphant account of the modern world. Within this account the modern world is associated with rapid technological change and innovations, machines and factories, railways and steamships. The history of  industrialisation thus becomes simply a story of development, and the modern age appears as a wonderful time of  technological progress. These images and associations have now become part of popular imagination. Do you not see rapid industrialisation as a time of progress and modernity? Do you not think that the spread of railways and factories, and construction of high-rise buildings and bridges is a sign of  society’s development? How have these images developed? And how do we relate to these ideas? Is industrialisation always based on rapid technological development? Can we today continue to glorify continuous Fig. 2 – Two Magicians, published in Inland Printers, 26 January 1901. mechanisation of all work? What has industrialisation meant to people’s lives? To answer such questions we need to turn to the history of industrialisation. In this chapter we will look at this history by focusing first on Britain, the first industrial nation, and then India, where the pattern of industrial change was conditioned by colonial rule. Activity Give two examples where modern development that is associated with progress has led to problems. You may like to think of areas related to environmental issues, nuclear weapons or disease. 80 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World 1  Before the Industrial Revolution All too often we associate industrialisation with the growth of factory industry. When we talk of  industrial production we refer to factory production. When we talk of industrial workers we mean factory workers. Histories of  industrialisation very often begin with the setting up of  the first factories. There is a problem with such ideas. Even before factories began to New words dot the landscape in England and Europe, there was large-scale industrial production for an international market. This was not based Proto – Indicating the first or early form on factories. Many historians now refer to this phase of of something industrialisation as proto-industrialisation. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, merchants from the towns in Europe began moving to the countryside, supplying money to peasants and artisans, persuading them to produce for an international market. With the expansion of world trade and the acquisition of colonies in different parts of the world, the demand for goods began growing. But merchants could not expand production within towns. This was because here urban crafts and trade guilds were powerful. These were associations of producers that trained craftspeople, maintained control over production, regulated competition and prices, and restricted the entry of new people into the trade. Rulers granted different guilds the monopoly right to produce and trade in specific products. It was therefore difficult for new merchants to set up business in towns. So they turned to the countryside. In the countryside poor peasants and artisans began working for merchants. As you have seen in the textbook last year, this was a time when open fields were disappearing and commons were being enclosed. Cottagers and poor peasants who had earlier depended on common lands for their survival, gathering their firewood, berries, vegetables, hay and straw, had to now look for alternative sources of income. Many had tiny plots of land which could not provide work for all members of the household. So Fig. 3 – Spinning in the eighteenth century. when merchants came around and offered advances You can see each member of the family involved in the to produce goods for them, peasant households production of yarn. Notice that one wheel is moving only one eagerly agreed. By working for the merchants, they spindle. 81 2024-25 The  Age  of  Industrialisation could remain in the countryside and continue to cultivate their small plots. Income from proto-industrial production supplemented their New words shrinking income from cultivation. It also allowed them a fuller use Stapler – A person who ‘staples’ or sorts wool of  their family labour resources. according to its fibre Within this system a close relationship developed between the town Fuller – A person who ‘fulls’ – that is, gathers – cloth by pleating and the countryside. Merchants were based in towns but the work was done mostly in the countryside. A merchant clothier in England Carding – The process in which fibres, such as purchased wool from a wool cotton or wool, are prepared prior to spinning stapler, and carried it to the spinners; the yarn (thread) that was spun was taken in subsequent stages of  production to weavers, fullers, and then to dyers. The finishing was done in London before the export merchant sold the cloth in the international market. London in fact came to be known as a finishing centre. This proto-industrial system was thus part of a network of commercial exchanges. It was controlled by merchants and the goods were produced by a vast number of producers working within their family farms, not in factories. At each stage of  production 20 to 25 workers were employed by each merchant. This meant that each clothier was controlling hundreds of  workers. 1.1 The Coming Up of the Factory The earliest factories in England came up by the 1730s. But it was only in the late eighteenth century that the number of factories multiplied. The first symbol of the new era was cotton. Its production boomed in the late nineteenth century. In 1760 Britain was importing 2.5 million pounds of  raw cotton to feed its cotton industry. By 1787 this import soared to 22 million pounds. This increase was linked to a number of changes within the process of production. Let us look briefly at some of these. A series of inventions in the eighteenth century increased the efficacy of each step of the production process (carding, twisting and spinning, and rolling). They enhanced the output per worker, enabling each worker to produce more, and they made possible the Fig. 4 – A Lancashire cotton mill, painted by C.E. Turner, The Illustrated London News, production of stronger threads and yarn. Then Richard Arkwright 1925. created the cotton mill. Till this time, as you have seen, cloth The artist said: ‘Seen through the humid atmosphere that makes Lancashire the best production was spread all over the countryside and carried out within cotton-spinning locality in the world, a huge village households. But now, the costly new machines could be cotton-mill aglow with electricity in the purchased, set up and maintained in the mill. Within the mill all the twilight, is a most impressive sight.’ 82 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World processes were brought together under one roof and management. This allowed a more careful supervision over the production process, Activity a watch over quality, and the regulation of  labour, all of  which had The way in which historians focus on been difficult to do when production was in the countryside. industrialisation rather than on small workshops is a good example of how what we In the early nineteenth century, factories increasingly became an believe today about the past is influenced by intimate part of the English landscape. So visible were the imposing what historians choose to notice and what they new mills, so magical seemed to be the power of  new technology, ignore. Note down one event or aspect of your that contemporaries were dazzled. They concentrated their attention own life which adults such as your parents or on the mills, almost forgetting the bylanes and the workshops where teachers may think is unimportant, but which production still continued. you believe to be important. Fig. 5 – Industrial Manchester by M. Jackson, The Illustrated London News, 1857. Chimneys billowing smoke came to characterise the industrial landscape. 1.2 The Pace of Industrial Change Activity How rapid was the process of industrialisation? Does industrialisation Look at Figs. 4 and 5. Can you see any mean only the growth of factory industries? difference in the way the two images show First: The most dynamic industries in Britain were clearly cotton and industrialisation? Explain your view briefly. metals. Growing at a rapid pace, cotton was the leading sector in the first phase of  industrialisation up to the 1840s. After that the iron and steel industry led the way. With the expansion of  railways, in England from the 1840s and in the colonies from the 1860s, the demand for iron and steel increased rapidly. By 1873 Britain was exporting iron and steel worth about £ 77 million, double the value of its cotton export. 83 2024-25 The  Age  of  Industrialisation Second: the new industries could not easily displace traditional industries. Even at the end of  the nineteenth century, less than 20 per cent of the total workforce was employed in technologically advanced industrial sectors. Textiles was a dynamic sector, but a large portion of the output was produced not within factories, but outside, within domestic units. Third: the pace of change in the ‘traditional’ industries was not set by steam-powered cotton or metal industries, but they did not remain entirely stagnant either. Seemingly ordinary and small innovations Fig. 6 – A fitting shop at a railway works in were the basis of growth in many non-mechanised sectors such as England, The Illustrated London News, 1849. In the fitting shop new locomotive engines were food processing, building, pottery, glass work, tanning, furniture completed and old ones repaired. making, and production of  implements. Fourth: technological changes occurred slowly. They did not spread dramatically across the industrial landscape. New technology was expensive and merchants and industrialists were cautious about using it. The machines often broke down and repair was costly. They were not as effective as their inventors and manufacturers claimed. Consider the case of  the steam engine. James Watt improved the steam engine produced by Newcomen and patented the new engine in 1781. His industrialist friend Mathew Boulton manufactured the new model. But for years he could find no buyers. At the beginning of the nineteenth century, there were no more than 321 steam engines all over England. Of these, 80 were in cotton industries, nine in wool industries, and the rest in mining, canal works and iron works. Steam engines were not used in any of the other industries till much later in the century. So even the most powerful new technology that enhanced the productivity of labour manifold was slow to be accepted by industrialists. Historians now have come to increasingly recognise that the typical worker in the mid-nineteenth century Fig. 7 – A spinning factory in 1830. was not a machine operator but the You can see how giant wheels moved by steam power could set in motion traditional craftsperson and labourer. hundreds of spindles to manufacture thread. 84 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World 2  Hand Labour and Steam Power In Victorian Britain there was no shortage of  human labour. Poor Source A peasants and vagrants moved to the cities in large numbers in search of  jobs, waiting for work. As you will know, when there is plenty of Will Thorne is one of those who went in search labour, wages are low. So industrialists had no problem of  labour of seasonal work, loading bricks and doing odd jobs. He describes how job-seekers walked to shortage or high wage costs. They did not want to introduce machines London in search of work: that got rid of human labour and required large capital investment. ‘I had always wanted to go to London, and my desire … was stimulated by letters from an old In many industries the demand for labour was seasonal. Gas works workmate … who was now working at the Old and breweries were especially busy through the cold months. So Kent Road Gas Works … I finally decided to go … they needed more workers to meet their peak demand.  Book- in November, 1881. With two friends I started out to walk the journey, filled with the hope binders and printers, catering to Christmas demand, too needed that we would be able to obtain employment, extra hands before December. At the waterfront, winter was the when we get there, with the kind assistance of time that ships were repaired and spruced up. In all such industries my friend … we had little money when we started, not enough to pay for our food and where production fluctuated with the season, industrialists usually lodgings each night until we arrived in London. preferred hand labour, employing workers for the season. Some days we walked as much as twenty miles, and other days less. Our money was gone at the end of the third day … For two nights we slept out – once under a haystack, and once in an old farm shed … On arrival in London we tried to find … my friend … but … were unsuccessful. Our money was gone, so there was nothing for us to do but to walk around until late at night, and then try to find some place to sleep. We found an old building and slept in it that night. The next day, Sunday, late in the afternoon, we got to the Old Kent Gas Works, and applied for work. To my great surprise, the man we had been looking for was working at the time. He spoke to the foreman and I was given a job.’ Quoted in Raphael Samuel, ‘Comers and Goers’, in H.J. Dyos and Michael Wolff, eds, The Victorian City: Images and Realities, 1973. Source Fig. 8 – People on the move in search of work, The Illustrated London News, 1879. Some people were always on the move selling small goods and looking for temporary work. Activity A range of products could be produced only with hand Imagine that you are a merchant writing back labour. Machines were oriented to producing uniforms, to a salesman who has been trying to persuade you to buy a new machine. Explain standardised goods for a mass market. But the demand in the market in your letter what you have heard and why you was often for goods with intricate designs and specific shapes. In do not wish to invest in the new technology. mid-nineteenth-century Britain, for instance, 500 varieties of 85 2024-25 The  Age  of  Industrialisation hammers were produced and 45 kinds of  axes. These required human skill, not mechanical technology. In Victorian Britain, the upper classes – the aristocrats and the bourgeoisie – preferred things produced by hand. Handmade products came to symbolise refinement and class. They were better finished, individually produced, and carefully designed. Machinemade goods were for export to the colonies. In countries with labour shortage, industrialists were keen on using mechanical power so that the need for human labour can be minimised. This was the case in nineteenth-century America. Britain, however, had no problem hiring human hands. 2.1 Life of the Workers Fig. 9 – Workers in an iron works, north-east England, painting by William Bell Scott, 1861. Many artists from the late nineteenth century The abundance of  labour in the market affected the lives of  workers. began idealising workers: they were shown As news of possible jobs travelled to the countryside, hundreds suffering hardship and pain for the cause of the nation. tramped to the cities. The actual possibility of  getting a job depended on existing networks of  friendship and kin relations. If  you had a relative or a friend in a factory, you were more likely to get a job quickly. But not everyone had social connections. Many jobseekers had to wait weeks, spending nights under bridges or in night Fig. 10 – Houseless and Hungry, painting by Samuel Luke Fildes, 1874. This painting shows the homeless in London applying for tickets to stay overnight in a workhouse. These shelters were maintained under the supervision of the Poor Law Commissioners for the ‘destitute, wayfarers, wanderers and foundling’. Staying in these workhouses was a humiliating experience: everyone was subjected to a medical examination to see whether they were carrying disease, their bodies were cleansed, and their clothes purified. They had to also do hard labour. 86 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World shelters. Some stayed in Night Refuges that were set up by private spindles individuals; others went to the Casual Wards maintained by the Poor Law authorities. Seasonality of work in many industries meant prolonged periods without work. After the busy season was over, the poor were on the streets again. Some returned to the countryside after the winter, when the demand for labour in the rural areas opened up in places. But most looked for odd jobs, which till the mid-nineteenth century were difficult to find. spindles Wages increased somewhat in the early nineteenth century. But they Fig. 11 – A Spinning Jenny, a drawing by tell us little about the welfare of  the workers. The average figures T.E. Nicholson, 1835. Notice the number of spindles that could be hide the variations between trades and the fluctuations from year to operated with one wheel. year. For instance, when prices rose sharply during the prolonged Napoleonic War, the real value of  what the workers earned fell significantly, since the same wages could now buy fewer things. Moreover, the income of workers depended not on the wage rate alone. What was also critical was the period of employment: the number of  days of  work determined the average daily income of New words the workers. At the best of  times till the mid-nineteenth century, about 10 per cent of  the urban population were extremely poor. In Spinning Jenny –  Devised by James Hargreaves periods of  economic slump, like the 1830s, the proportion of in 1764, this machine speeded up the spinning unemployed went up to anything between 35 and 75 per cent in process and reduced labour demand. By different regions. turning one single wheel a worker could set in motion a number of spindles and spin several The fear of unemployment made workers hostile to the introduction threads at the same time. of  new technology. When the Spinning Jenny was introduced in Source B Discuss A magistrate reported in 1790 about an incident when he was Look at Figs. 3, 7 and 11, then reread source B. called in to protect a manufacturer’s property from being attacked by workers: Explain why many workers were opposed to the ‘From the depredations of a lawless Banditti of colliers and their use of the Spinning Jenny. wives, for the wives had lost their work to spinning engines … they advanced at first with much insolence, avowing their intention of cutting to pieces the machine lately introduced in the woollen manufacture; which they suppose, if generally adopted, will lessen the demand for manual labour. The women became clamorous. The men were more open to conviction and after some expostulation were induced to desist from their purpose and return peaceably home.’ J.L. Hammond and B. Hammond, The Skilled Labourer 1760-1832, quoted in Maxine Berg, The Age of Manufactures. Source 87 2024-25 The  Age  of  Industrialisation Fig. 12 – A shallow underground railway being constructed in central London,  Illustrated Times, 1868. From the 1850s railway stations began coming up all over London. This meant a demand for large numbers of workers to dig tunnels, erect timber scaffolding, do the brick and iron works. Job-seekers moved from one construction site to another. the woollen industry, women who survived on hand spinning began attacking the new machines. This conflict over the introduction of the jenny continued for a long time. After the 1840s, building activity intensified in the cities, opening up greater opportunities of employment. Roads were widened, new railway stations came up, railway lines were extended, tunnels dug, drainage and sewers laid, rivers embanked. The number of workers employed in the transport industry doubled in the 1840s, and doubled again in the subsequent 30 years. 88 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World 3  Industrialisation in the Colonies Let us now move to India to see how a colony industrialises. Once again we will look not only at factory industries but also at the non-mechanised sector. We will limit our discussion primarily to textile industries. 3.1 The Age of Indian Textiles Before the age of machine industries, silk and cotton goods from India dominated the international market in textiles. Coarser cottons were produced in many countries, but the finer varieties often came from India. Armenian and Persian merchants took the goods from Punjab to Afghanistan, eastern Persia and Central Asia.  Bales of fine textiles were carried on camel back via the north-west frontier, through mountain passes and across deserts. A vibrant sea trade operated Activity through the main pre-colonial ports. Surat on the Gujarat coast On a map of Asia, find and draw the sea and connected India to the Gulf  and Red Sea Ports; Masulipatam on land links of the textile trade from India to the Coromandel coast  and Hoogly in Bengal had trade links with Central Asia, West Asia and Southeast Asia. Southeast Asian ports. A variety of Indian merchants and bankers were involved in this network of export trade – financing production, carrying goods and supplying exporters. Supply merchants linked the port towns to the inland regions. They gave advances to weavers, procured the woven cloth from weaving villages, and carried the supply to the ports. At the port, the big shippers and export merchants had brokers who negotiated the price and bought goods from the supply merchants operating inland. By the 1750s this network, controlled by Indian merchants, was breaking down. The European companies gradually gained power – first securing a variety of concessions from local courts, then the monopoly rights to trade. This resulted in a decline of the old ports of Surat and Hoogly through which local merchants had operated. Exports from these ports fell dramatically, the credit that had financed the earlier trade began drying up, and the local bankers slowly went bankrupt. In the last years of  the seventeenth century, the gross value of  trade that passed through Surat had been Rs 16 million. By the 1740s it had slumped to Rs 3 million. 89 2024-25 The  Age  of  Industrialisation Fig. 13 – The English factory at Surat, a seventeenth-century drawing. While Surat and Hoogly decayed, Bombay and Calcutta grew. This shift from the old ports to the new ones was an indicator of the growth of  colonial power. Trade through the new ports came to be controlled by European companies, and was carried in European ships. While many of  the old trading houses collapsed, those that wanted to survive had to now operate within a network shaped by European trading companies. How did these changes affect the life of weavers and other artisans? 3.2 What Happened to Weavers? The consolidation of East India Company power after the 1760s did not initially lead to a decline in textile exports from India. British cotton industries had not yet expanded and Indian fine textiles were in great demand in Europe. So the company was keen on expanding textile exports from India. Before establishing political power in Bengal and Carnatic in the 1760s and 1770s, the East India Company had found it difficult to ensure a regular supply of goods for export. The French, Dutch, Fig. 14 – A weaver at work, Gujarat. 90 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World Portuguese as well as the local traders competed in the market to secure woven cloth. So the weaver and supply merchants could bargain and try selling the produce to the best buyer. In their letters back to London, Company officials continuously complained of difficulties of supply and the high prices. However, once the East India Company established political power, it could assert a monopoly right to trade. It proceeded to develop a system of management and control that would eliminate competition, control costs, and ensure regular supplies of cotton and silk goods. This it did through a series of steps. First: the Company tried to eliminate the existing traders and brokers connected with the cloth trade, and establish a more direct control over the weaver. It appointed a paid servant called the gomastha to supervise weavers, collect supplies, and examine the quality of cloth. Second: it prevented Company weavers from dealing with other buyers. One way of  doing this was through the system of  advances. Once an order was placed, the weavers were given loans to purchase the raw material for their production. Those who took loans had to hand over the cloth they produced to the gomastha. They could not take it to any other trader. As loans flowed in and the demand for fine textiles expanded, weavers eagerly took the advances, hoping to earn more. Many weavers had small plots of land which they had earlier cultivated along with weaving, and the produce from this took care of their family needs. Now they had to lease out the land and devote all their time to weaving. Weaving, in fact, required the labour of  the entire family, with children and women all engaged in different stages of the process. New words Soon, however, in many weaving villages there were reports of clashes between weavers and gomasthas. Earlier supply merchants had Sepoy – This is how the British pronounced very often lived within the weaving  villages, and had a close the word sipahi, meaning an Indian soldier in relationship with the weavers, looking after their needs and helping the service of  the British them in times of  crisis. The new gomasthas were outsiders, with no long-term social link with the village. They acted arrogantly, marched into villages with sepoys and peons, and punished weavers for delays in supply – often beating and flogging them. The weavers lost the space to bargain for prices and sell to different buyers: the price they received from the Company was miserably low and the loans they had accepted tied them to the Company. 91 2024-25 The  Age  of  Industrialisation In many places in Carnatic and Bengal, weavers deserted villages and migrated, setting up looms in other villages where they had some family relation. Elsewhere, weavers along with the village traders revolted, opposing the Company and its officials. Over time many weavers began refusing loans, closing down their workshops and taking to agricultural labour. By the turn of the nineteenth century, cotton weavers faced a new set of problems. 3.3 Manchester Comes to India In 1772, Henry Patullo, a Company official, had ventured to Source C say that the demand for Indian textiles could never reduce, since no other nation produced goods of the same quality. Yet by The Commissioner of Patna wrote: the beginning of the nineteenth century we see the beginning of ‘It appears that twenty yeas ago, a brisk trade a long decline of textile exports from India. In 1811-12 was carried on in the manufacture of cloth at Jahanabad, and Behar, which has in the former piece-goods accounted for 33 per cent of India’s exports; by place entirely ceased, while in the latter the 1850-51 it was no more than 3 per cent. amount of manufacture is very limited, in consequence of the cheap and durable goods Why did this happen? What were its implications? from Manchester with which the Native manufactures are unable to compete.’ As cotton industries developed in England, industrial groups began Quoted in J. Krishnamurty, ‘Deindustrialisation in worrying about imports from other countries. They pressurised Gangetic Bihar during the nineteenth century’, the government to impose import duties on cotton textiles so that The Indian Economic and Social History Review, 1985. Manchester goods could sell in Britain without facing any Source competition from outside. At the same time industrialists persuaded the East India Company  to sell British manufactures in Indian markets as well. Exports of British cotton goods increased Source D dramatically in the early nineteenth century.  At the end of the eighteenth century there had been virtually no import of cotton Reporting on the Koshtis, a community of piece-goods into India.  But by 1850 cotton piece-goods constituted weavers, the Census Report of  Central Provinces over 31 per cent of the value of Indian imports; and by the 1870s stated: this figure  was over 50 per cent. ‘The Koshtis, like the weavers of the finer kinds of cloth in other parts of India, have fallen upon Cotton weavers in India thus faced two problems at the same time: evil times. They are unable to compete with the their export market collapsed, and the local market shrank, being showy goods which Manchester sends in such profusion, and they have of late years emigrated glutted with Manchester imports. Produced by machines at lower in great numbers, chiefly to Berar, where as day costs, the imported cotton goods were so cheap that weavers could labourers they are able to obtain wages …’ not easily compete with them. By the 1850s, reports from most Census Report of Central Provinces, 1872, quoted in Sumit Guha, ‘The handloom industry in Central weaving regions of India narrated stories of decline and desolation. India, 1825-1950’, The Indian Economic and Social By the 1860s, weavers faced a new problem. They could not get History Review. Source sufficient supply of raw cotton of good quality. When the American 92 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World Fig. 15 –  Bombay harbour, a late-eighteenth-century drawing. Bombay and Calcutta grew as trading ports from the 1780s. This marked the decline of the old trading order and the growth of the colonial economy. Civil War broke out and cotton supplies from the US were cut off, Britain turned to India. As raw cotton exports from India increased, the price of raw cotton shot up. Weavers in India were starved of supplies and forced to buy raw cotton at exorbitant prices. In this, situation weaving could not pay. Then, by the end of  the nineteenth century, weavers and other craftspeople faced yet another problem. Factories in India began production, flooding the market with machine-goods. How could weaving industries possibly survive? 93 2024-25 The  Age  of  Industrialisation 4  Factories Come Up The first cotton mill in Bombay came up in 1854 and it went into production two years later. By 1862 four mills were at work with 94,000 spindles and 2,150 looms. Around the same time jute mills came up in Bengal, the first being set up in 1855 and another one seven years later, in 1862. In north India, the Elgin Mill was started in Kanpur in the 1860s, and a year later the first cotton mill of Ahmedabad was set up. By 1874, the first spinning and weaving mill of Madras began production. Who set up the industries? Where did the capital come from? Who came to work in the mills? Fig. 16 – Jamsetjee Jeejeebhoy. Jeejeebhoy was the son of a Parsi weaver. Like many others of his time, he was involved in 4.1 The Early Entrepreneurs the China trade and shipping. He owned a large fleet of ships, but competition from Industries were set up in different regions by varying sorts of people. English and American shippers forced him to sell his ships by the 1850s. Let us see who they were. The history of many business groups goes back to trade with China. From the late eighteenth century, as you have read in your book last year, the British in India began exporting opium to China and took tea from China to England. Many Indians became junior players in this trade, providing finance, procuring supplies, and shipping consignments. Having earned through trade, some of  these businessmen had visions of developing industrial enterprises in India. In Bengal, Dwarkanath Tagore made his fortune in the China trade before he turned to industrial investment, setting up six joint-stock companies in the 1830s and 1840s.  Tagore’s enterprises sank along with those of others in the wider business crises of the 1840s, but later in the nineteenth century many of the China traders became