Nationalism in India As you have seen, modern nationalism in Europe came to be associated with the formation of  nation-states. It also meant a change in people’s understanding of  who they were, and what defined their identity and sense of  belonging. New symbols and icons, new songs and ideas forged new links and redefined the boundaries of communities. In most countries the making of  this new national identity was a long process. How did this consciousness emerge in India? In India and as in  many other colonies, the growth of modern nationalism is intimately connected to the anti-colonial movement. People began discovering their unity in the process of  their struggle with colonialism. The sense of being oppressed under colonialism provided a shared bond that tied many different groups together. But each class and group felt the effects of  colonialism differently, their experiences were varied, and their notions of freedom were not always the same.  The Congress under Mahatma Gandhi tried to forge these groups together within one movement. But the unity did not emerge without conflict. In an earlier textbook you have read about the growth of nationalism in India up to the first decade of  the twentieth century. In this chapter we will pick up the story from the 1920s and study the NonCooperation and Civil Disobedience Movements. We will explore how the Congress sought to develop the national movement, how different social groups participated in the movement, and how nationalism captured the imagination of people. Fig. 1 – 6 April 1919. Mass processions on the streets became a common feature during the national movement. 29 2024-25 National ism  in  India Chapter II National ism  in  India 1  The First World War, Khilafat and Non-Cooperation In the years after 1919, we see the national movement spreading to new areas, incorporating new social groups, and developing new modes of  struggle. How do we understand these developments? What implications did they have? First of all, the war created a new economic and political situation. It led to a huge increase in defence expenditure which was financed by war loans and increasing taxes: customs duties were raised and income tax introduced. Through the war years prices increased – doubling between 1913 and 1918 –  leading to extreme hardship for the common people. Villages were called upon to supply soldiers, and the forced recruitment in rural areas caused widespread anger. Then in 1918-19 and 1920-21, crops failed in many parts of India, New words resulting in acute shortages of food. This was accompanied by an Forced recruitment – A process by which the influenza epidemic. According to the census of 1921, 12 to 13 million people perished as a result of famines and  the epidemic. colonial state forced people to join the army People hoped that their hardships would end after the war was over. But that did not happen. At this stage a new leader appeared and suggested a new mode of  struggle. 1.1 The Idea of Satyagraha Mahatma Gandhi returned to India in January 1915. As you know, he had come from South Africa where he had successfully fought Fig. 2 – Indian workers in South Africa march through Volksrust, 6 November 1913. Mahatma Gandhi was leading the workers from Newcastle to Transvaal. When the marchers were stopped and Gandhiji arrested, thousands of more workers joined the satyagraha against racist laws that denied rights  to non-whites. 30 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World the racist regime with a novel method of mass agitation, which he Source A called satyagraha. The idea of satyagraha emphasised the power of truth and the need to search for truth. It suggested that if  the cause Mahatma Gandhi on Satyagraha was true, if  the struggle was against injustice, then physical force was ‘It is said of “passive resistance” that it is the not necessary to fight the oppressor. Without seeking vengeance or weapon of the weak, but the power which is the subject of this article can be used only being aggressive, a satyagrahi could win the battle through nonby the strong. This power is not passive violence. This could be done by  appealing to the conscience of the resistance; indeed it calls for intense activity. The oppressor. People – including the oppressors – had to be persuaded movement in South Africa was not passive but active  … to see the truth, instead of being forced to accept truth through the ‘ Satyagraha is not physical force. A satyagrahi use of  violence. By this struggle, truth was bound to ultimately does not inflict pain on the adversary; he does triumph. Mahatma Gandhi believed that this dharma of non-violence not seek his destruction … In the use of could unite all Indians. satyagraha, there is no ill-will whatever. ‘ Satyagraha is pure soul-force. Truth is the very After arriving in India, Mahatma Gandhi successfully organised substance of the soul. That is why this force is satyagraha movements in various places. In 1917 he travelled to called satyagraha. The soul is informed with knowledge. In it burns the flame of love. … NonChamparan in  Bihar to inspire the peasants to struggle against the violence is the supreme dharma … oppressive plantation system. Then in 1917,  he organised a satyagraha ‘It is certain that India cannot rival Britain or to support the peasants of the Kheda district of Gujarat. Affected Europe in force of arms. The British worship the by crop failure and a plague epidemic, the peasants of Kheda could war-god and they can all of them become, as they are becoming, bearers of arms. The not pay the revenue, and were demanding that revenue collection be hundreds of millions in India can never carry arms. relaxed. In 1918, Mahatma Gandhi went to Ahmedabad to organise They have made the religion of non-violence their a satyagraha movement amongst cotton mill workers. own ...’ Source 1.2 The Rowlatt Act Activity Emboldened with this success, Gandhiji in 1919 decided to launch a nationwide satyagraha against the proposed Rowlatt Act (1919). This Read the text carefully. What did Mahatma Act had been hurriedly passed through the Imperial Legislative Gandhi mean when he said satyagraha is Council despite the united opposition of  the Indian members. It active resistance? gave the government enormous powers to repress political activities, and allowed detention of political prisoners without trial for two years. Mahatma Gandhi wanted non-violent civil disobedience against such unjust laws, which would start with a hartal on 6 April. Rallies were organised in various cities, workers went on strike in railway workshops, and shops closed down. Alarmed by the popular upsurge, and scared that lines of communication such as the railways and telegraph would be disrupted, the British administration decided to clamp down on nationalists. Local leaders were picked up from Amritsar, and Mahatma Gandhi was barred from entering Delhi. On 10 April, the police in Amritsar fired upon a peaceful procession, provoking widespread attacks on banks, post offices and railway stations. Martial law was imposed and General Dyer took command. 31 2024-25 National ism  in  India On 13 April the infamous Jallianwalla Bagh incident took place. On that day a large crowd gathered in the enclosed ground of Jallianwalla Bagh. Some came to protest against the government’s new repressive measures. Others had come to attend the annual Baisakhi fair.  Being from outside the city, many villagers were unaware of  the martial law that had been imposed. Dyer entered the area, blocked the exit points, and opened fire on the crowd, killing hundreds. His object, as he declared later, was to ‘produce a moral effect’, to create in the minds of satyagrahis a feeling of terror and awe. As the news of Jallianwalla Bagh spread, crowds took to the streets in many north Indian towns. There were strikes, clashes with the police and attacks on government buildings. The government responded with brutal repression, seeking to humiliate and terrorise people: satyagrahis were forced to rub their noses on the ground, crawl on the streets, and do salaam (salute) to all sahibs; people were flogged and villages (around Gujranwala in Punjab, now in Pakistan) were bombed. Seeing violence spread, Mahatma Gandhi called off the movement. Fig. 3 – General Dyer’s ‘crawling orders’ being While the Rowlatt satyagraha had been a widespread movement, it administered by British soldiers, Amritsar, Punjab, 1919. was still limited mostly to cities and towns. Mahatma Gandhi now felt the need to launch a more broad-based movement in India.  But he was certain that no such movement could be organised without bringing the Hindus and Muslims closer together. One way of  doing this, he felt, was to take up the Khilafat issue. The First World War had ended with the defeat of  Ottoman Turkey. And there were rumours that a harsh peace treaty was going to be imposed on the Ottoman emperor –  the spiritual head of  the Islamic world (the Khalifa). To defend the Khalifa’s temporal powers, a Khilafat Committee was formed in Bombay in March 1919. A young generation of  Muslim leaders like the brothers Muhammad Ali and Shaukat Ali, began discussing with Mahatma Gandhi about the possibility of a united mass action on the issue. Gandhiji saw this as an opportunity to bring Muslims under the umbrella of a unified national movement. At the Calcutta session of the Congress in September 1920, he convinced other leaders of the need to start a non-cooperation movement in support of Khilafat as well as for swaraj. 1.3  Why Non-cooperation? In his famous book Hind Swaraj (1909) Mahatma Gandhi declared that British rule was established in India with the cooperation of 32 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World Indians, and had survived only because of this cooperation. If  Indians refused to cooperate, British rule in India would collapse within a year, and swaraj would come. How could non-cooperation become a movement? Gandhiji proposed that the movement should unfold in stages. It should begin with the surrender of titles that the government awarded, and a New words boycott of  civil services, army, police, courts and legislative councils, Boycott – The refusal to deal and associate with schools, and foreign goods. Then, in case the government used people, or participate in activities, or buy and repression, a full civil disobedience campaign would be launched. use things; usually a form of  protest Through the summer of 1920 Mahatma Gandhi and Shaukat Ali toured extensively, mobilising popular support for the movement. Many within the Congress were, however, concerned about the proposals. They were reluctant to boycott the council elections scheduled for November 1920, and they feared that the movement might lead to popular violence.  In the months between September and December there was an intense tussle within the Congress. For a while there seemed no meeting point between the supporters and the opponents of  the movement. Finally, at the Congress session at Nagpur in December 1920, a compromise was worked out and the Non-Cooperation programme was adopted. How did the movement unfold? Who participated in it? How did different social groups conceive of the idea of Non-Cooperation? Fig. 4 – The boycott of foreign cloth, July 1922. Foreign cloth was seen as the symbol of Western economic and cultural domination. 33 2024-25 National ism  in  India 2  Differing Strands within the Movement The Non-Cooperation-Khilafat Movement began in January 1921. Various social groups participated in this movement, each with its own specific aspiration. All of them responded to the call of Swaraj, but the term meant different things to different people. 2.1 The Movement in the Towns The movement started with middle-class participation in the cities. Thousands of students left government-controlled schools and colleges, headmasters and teachers resigned, and lawyers gave up their legal practices. The council elections were boycotted in most provinces except Madras, where the Justice Party, the party of  the non-Brahmans, felt that entering the council was one way of gaining some power – something that usually only Brahmans had access to. The effects of non-cooperation on the economic front were more New words dramatic. Foreign goods were boycotted, liquor shops picketed, and foreign cloth burnt in huge bonfires. The import of  foreign Picket – A form of  demonstration or protest cloth halved between 1921 and 1922, its value dropping from by which people block the entrance to a shop, Rs 102 crore to Rs 57 crore. In many places merchants and traders factory or office refused to trade in foreign goods or finance foreign trade. As the boycott movement spread, and people began discarding imported clothes and wearing only Indian ones, production of Indian textile mills and handlooms went up. But this movement in the cities gradually slowed down for a variety of  reasons. Khadi cloth was often more expensive than massproduced mill cloth and poor people could not afford to buy it. Activity How then could they boycott mill cloth for too long? Similarly the boycott of  British institutions posed a problem. For the movement The year is 1921. You are a student in a to be successful, alternative Indian institutions had to be set up government-controlled school. Design a so that they could be used in place of  the British ones. These were poster urging school students to answer Gandhiji’s call to join the Non-Cooperation slow to come up. So students and teachers began trickling Movement. back to government schools and lawyers joined back work in government courts. 2.2 Rebellion in the Countryside From the cities, the Non-Cooperation Movement spread to the countryside. It drew into its fold the struggles of  peasants and tribals 34 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World which were developing in different parts of India in the years after the war. In Awadh, peasants were led by Baba Ramchandra – a sanyasi who had earlier been to Fiji as an indentured labourer. The movement New words here was against talukdars and landlords who demanded from Begar – Labour that villagers were forced to peasants exorbitantly high rents and a variety of  other cesses. Peasants contribute without any payment had to do begar and work at landlords’ farms without any payment. As tenants they had no security of tenure, being regularly evicted so that they could acquire no right over the leased land. The peasant movement demanded reduction of revenue, abolition of begar, and social boycott of  oppressive landlords. In many places nai – dhobi Activity bandhs were organised by panchayats to deprive landlords of the If you were a peasant in Uttar Pradesh in 1920, services of  even barbers and washermen. In June 1920, Jawaharlal how would you have responded to Gandhiji’s call for Swaraj? Give reasons for your response. Nehru began going around the villages in Awadh, talking to the villagers, and trying to understand their grievances. By October, the Oudh Kisan Sabha was set up headed by Jawaharlal Nehru, Baba Ramchandra and a few others. Within a month, over 300 branches had been set up in the villages around the region. So when the NonIn 1928, Vallabhbhai Patel led the peasant Cooperation Movement began the following year, the effort of the movement in Bardoli, a taluka in Gujarat, against Congress was to integrate the Awadh peasant struggle into the wider enhancement of land revenue. Known as the Bardoli Satyagraha, this movement was a success struggle. The peasant movement, however, developed in forms that under the able leadership of Vallabhbhai Patel. the Congress leadership was unhappy with. As the movement spread The struggle was widely publicised and in 1921, the houses of talukdars and merchants were attacked, generated immense sympathy in many parts of India. bazaars were looted, and grain hoards were taken over. In many places local leaders told peasants that Gandhiji had declared that no taxes were to be paid and land was to be redistributed among the poor. The name of  the Mahatma was being invoked to sanction all action and aspirations. Source B On 6 January 1921, the police in United Provinces fired at peasants near Rae Bareli. Jawaharlal Nehru wanted to go to the place of firing, but was stopped by the police. Agitated and angry, Nehru addressed the peasants who gathered around him. This is how he later described the meeting: ‘They behaved as brave men, calm and unruffled in the face of danger. I do not know how they felt but I know what my feelings were. For a moment my blood was up, non-violence was almost forgotten – but for a moment only. The thought of the great leader, who by God’s goodness has been sent to lead us to victory, came to me, and I saw the kisans seated and standing near me, less excited, more peaceful than I was – and the moment of weakness passed, I spoke to them in all humility on non-violence – I needed the lesson more than they – and they heeded me and peacefully dispersed.’ Quoted in Sarvapalli Gopal, Jawaharlal Nehru: A Biography, Vol. I. Source 35 2024-25 National ism  in  India Tribal peasants interpreted the message of  Mahatma Gandhi and the idea of  swaraj in yet another way. In the Gudem Hills of  Andhra Pradesh, for instance, a militant guerrilla movement spread in the early 1920s –  not a form of  struggle that the Congress could approve. Here, as in other forest regions, the colonial government had closed large forest areas, preventing people from entering the forests to graze their cattle, or to collect fuelwood and fruits. This enraged the hill people. Not only were their livelihoods affected but they felt that their traditional rights were being denied. When the government began forcing them to contribute begar for road building, the hill people revolted. The person who came to lead them was an interesting figure. Alluri Sitaram Raju claimed that he had a variety of special powers: he could make correct astrological predictions and heal people, and he could survive even bullet shots. Captivated by Raju, the rebels proclaimed that he was an incarnation of God. Raju talked of the greatness of Mahatma Gandhi, said he was inspired by the Non-Cooperation Movement, and persuaded people to wear khadi and give up drinking. But at the same time he asserted that India could be liberated only by the use of force, not non-violence. The Gudem rebels attacked police stations, attempted to kill British officials and carried on guerrilla warfare for achieving swaraj.  Raju was captured and executed in 1924, and over time became a folk hero. 2.3 Swaraj in the Plantations Workers too had their own understanding of  Mahatma Gandhi and the notion of  swaraj.  For plantation workers in Assam, freedom Activity meant the right to move freely in and out of the confined space in Find out about other participants in the which they were enclosed, and it meant retaining a link with the National Movement who were captured and village from which they had come. Under the Inland Emigration put to death by the British. Can you think of a Act of  1859, plantation workers were not permitted to leave the similar example from the national movement in Indo-China (Chapter 2)? tea gardens without permission, and in fact they were rarely given such permission. When they heard of  the Non-Cooperation Movement, thousands of workers defied the authorities, left the plantations and headed home. They believed that Gandhi Raj was coming and everyone would be given land in their own villages. They, however, never reached their destination. Stranded on the way by a railway and steamer strike, they were caught by the police and brutally beaten up. 36 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World The visions of these movements were not defined by the Congress programme. They interpreted the term swaraj in their own ways, imagining it to be a time when all suffering and all troubles would be over. Yet, when the tribals chanted Gandhiji’s name and raised slogans demanding ‘Swatantra Bharat’, they were also emotionally relating to an all-India agitation. When they acted in the name of Mahatma Gandhi, or linked their movement to that of the Congress, they were identifying with a movement which went beyond the limits of  their immediate locality. Fig. 5 – Chauri Chaura, 1922. At Chauri Chaura in Gorakhpur, a peaceful demonstration in a bazaar turned into a violent clash with the police. Hearing of the incident, Mahatma Gandhi called a halt to the Non-Cooperation Movement. 37 2024-25 National ism  in  India 3  Towards Civil Disobedience In February 1922, Mahatma Gandhi decided to withdraw the Lala Lajpat Rai was assaulted by the British police Non-Cooperation Movement. He felt the movement was turning during a peaceful demonstration against the violent in many places and satyagrahis needed to be properly trained Simon Commission. He succumbed to injuries before they would be ready for mass struggles. Within the Congress, that were infl icted on him during the demonstration. some leaders were by now tired of  mass struggles and wanted to participate in elections to the provincial councils that had been set up by the Government of India Act of 1919. They felt that it was important to oppose British policies within the councils, argue for reform and also demonstrate that these councils were not truly democratic. C. R. Das and Motilal Nehru formed the Swaraj Party within the Congress to argue for a return to council politics. But younger leaders like Jawaharlal Nehru and Subhas Chandra Bose pressed for more radical mass agitation and for full independence. In such a situation of internal debate and dissension two factors again shaped Indian politics towards the late 1920s. The first was the effect of the worldwide economic depression. Agricultural prices began to fall from 1926 and collapsed after 1930. As the demand for agricultural goods fell and exports declined, peasants found it difficult to sell their harvests and pay their revenue. By 1930, the countryside was in turmoil. Against this background the new Tory government in Britain constituted a Statutory Commission under Sir John Simon. Set up in response to the nationalist movement, the commission was to look into the functioning of the constitutional system in India and suggest changes. The problem was that the commission did not have a single Indian member. They were all British. When the Simon Commission arrived in India in 1928, it was greeted with the slogan ‘Go back Simon’. All parties, including the Congress and the Muslim League, participated in the demonstrations. In an effort to win them over, the viceroy, Lord Irwin, announced in October 1929, a vague offer of ‘dominion status’ for India in an unspecified future, and a Round Table Conference to discuss a Fig. 6 – Meeting of Congress leaders  at Allahabad, 1931. Apart from Mahatma Gandhi, you can see Sardar Vallabhbhai future constitution. This did not satisfy the Congress Patel (extreme left), Jawaharlal Nehru (extreme right) and Subhas leaders. The radicals within the Congress, led by Chandra Bose (fifth from right). 38 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World Jawaharlal Nehru and Subhas Chandra Bose, became more assertive. Source C The liberals and moderates, who were proposing a constitutional system within the framework of British dominion, gradually lost The Independence Day Pledge, 26 January their influence. In December 1929, under the presidency of Jawaharlal 1930 Nehru, the Lahore Congress formalised the demand of  ‘Purna ‘We believe that it is the inalienable right of the Indian people, as of any other people, to have Swaraj’ or full independence for India. It was declared that 26 January freedom and to enjoy the fruits of their toil and 1930, would be celebrated as the Independence Day when people have the necessities of life, so that they may were to take a pledge to struggle for complete independence. But have full opportunities of growth. We believe also that if any government deprives a people of the celebrations attracted very little attention. So Mahatma Gandhi these rights and oppresses them, the people had to find a way to relate this abstract idea of freedom to more have a further right to alter it or to abolish it. concrete issues of everyday life. The British Government in India has not only deprived the Indian people of their freedom but has based itself on the exploitation of the masses, 3.1 The Salt March and the Civil Disobedience Movement and has ruined India economically, politically, culturally, and spiritually. We believe, therefore, Mahatma Gandhi found in salt a powerful symbol that could unite that India must sever the British connection and attain Purna Swaraj or Complete Independence.’ the nation. On 31 January 1930, he sent a letter to Viceroy Irwin stating eleven demands. Some of  these were of  general interest; Source others were specific demands of different classes, from industrialists to peasants. The idea was to make the demands wide-ranging, so that all classes within Indian society could identify with them and everyone could be brought together in a united campaign. The most stirring of all was the demand to abolish the salt tax. Salt was something consumed by the rich and the poor alike, and it was one of the most essential items of food. The tax on salt and the government monopoly over its production, Mahatma Gandhi declared, revealed the most oppressive face of British rule. Mahatma Gandhi’s letter was, in a way, an ultimatum. If  the demands were not fulfilled by 11 March, the letter stated, the Congress would launch a civil disobedience campaign. Irwin was unwilling to negotiate. So Mahatma Gandhi started his famous salt march accompanied by 78 of  his trusted volunteers. The march was over 240 miles, from Gandhiji’s ashram in Sabarmati to the Gujarati coastal town of Dandi. The volunteers walked for 24 days, about 10 miles a day. Thousands came to hear Mahatma Gandhi wherever he stopped, and he told them what he meant by swaraj and urged them to peacefully defy the British. On 6 April he reached Dandi, and ceremonially violated the law, manufacturing salt by boiling sea water. This marked the beginning of the Civil Disobedience Movement. How was this movement different from the Non-Cooperation Movement? People were now asked not only to refuse cooperation 39 2024-25 National ism  in  India Fig. 7 – The Dandi march. During the salt march Mahatma Gandhi was accompanied by 78 volunteers. On the way they were joined by thousands. with the British, as they had done in 1921-22, but also to break colonial laws. Thousands in different parts of  the country broke the salt law, manufactured salt and demonstrated in front of government salt factories. As the movement spread, foreign cloth was boycotted, and liquor shops were picketed. Peasants refused to pay revenue and chaukidari taxes, village officials resigned, and in many places forest people violated forest laws – going into Reserved Forests to collect wood and graze cattle. Worried by the developments, the colonial government began arresting the Congress leaders one by one. This led to violent clashes in many palaces. When Abdul Ghaffar Khan, a devout disciple of Mahatma Gandhi, was arrested in April 1930, angry crowds demonstrated in the streets of  Peshawar, facing armoured cars and police firing. Many were killed. A month later, when Mahatma Gandhi himself was arrested, industrial workers in Sholapur attacked police posts, municipal buildings, lawcourts and railway stations – all structures that symbolised British rule. A frightened government responded with a policy of brutal repression. Peaceful satyagrahis were attacked, women and children were beaten, and about 100,000 people were arrested. In such a situation, Mahatma Gandhi once again decided to call off the movement and entered into a pact with Irwin on 5 March 1931. By this Gandhi-Irwin Pact, Gandhiji consented to participate in a Fig. 8 – Police cracked down on satyagrahis, Round Table Conference (the Congress had boycotted the first 1930. 40 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World Round Table Conference) in London and the government agreed to Box 1 release the political prisoners. In December 1931, Gandhiji went to ‘To the altar of this revolution we have London for the conference, but the negotiations broke down and brought our youth as incense’ he returned disappointed. Back in India, he discovered that the Many nationalists thought that the struggle government had begun a new cycle of repression. Ghaffar Khan against the British could not be won through and Jawaharlal Nehru were both in jail, the Congress had been non-violence. In 1928, the Hindustan Socialist Republican Army (HSRA) was founded at a declared illegal, and a series of measures had been imposed to prevent meeting in Ferozeshah Kotla ground in Delhi. meetings, demonstrations and boycotts. With great apprehension, Amongst its leaders were Bhagat Singh, Jatin Mahatma Gandhi relaunched the Civil Disobedience Movement. Das and Ajoy Ghosh. In a series of dramatic For over a year, the movement continued, but by 1934 it lost actions in different parts of India, the HSRA targeted some of the symbols of British power. its momentum. In April 1929, Bhagat Singh and Batukeswar Dutta threw a bomb in the Legislative Assembly. In the same year there was an attempt to blow 3.2 How Participants saw the Movement up the train that Lord Irwin was travelling in. Bhagat Singh was 23 when he was tried and Let us now look at the different social groups that participated in the executed by the colonial government. During Civil Disobedience Movement. Why did they join the movement? his trial, Bhagat Singh stated that he did not What were their ideals? What did swaraj mean to them? wish to glorify ‘the cult of the bomb and pistol’ but wanted a revolution in society: In the countryside, rich peasant communities – like the Patidars of ‘Revolution is the inalienable right of mankind. Gujarat and the Jats of Uttar Pradesh – were active in the movement. Freedom is the imprescriptible birthright of all. The labourer is the real sustainer of society … Being producers of commercial crops, they were very hard hit by To the altar of this revolution we have brought the trade depression and falling prices. As their cash income our youth as incense, for no sacrifice is too disappeared, they found it impossible to pay the government’s revenue great for so magnificent a cause. We are content. We await the advent of revolution. demand. And the refusal of the government to reduce the revenue Inquilab Zindabad!’ demand led to widespread resentment. These rich peasants became enthusiastic supporters of the Civil Disobedience Movement, organising their communities, and at times forcing reluctant members, to participate in the boycott programmes. For them the fight for swaraj was a struggle against high revenues. But they were deeply disappointed when the movement was called off in 1931 without the revenue rates being revised. So when the movement was restarted in 1932, many of them refused to participate. The poorer peasantry were not just interested in the lowering of the revenue demand. Many of them were small tenants cultivating land they had rented from landlords. As the Depression continued and cash incomes dwindled, the small tenants found it difficult to pay their rent. They wanted the unpaid rent to the landlord to be remitted. They joined a variety of radical movements, often led by Socialists and Communists. Apprehensive of  raising issues that might upset the rich peasants and landlords, the Congress was unwilling to support ‘no rent’ campaigns in most places. So the relationship between the poor peasants and the Congress remained uncertain. 41 2024-25 National ism  in  India What about the business classes? How did they relate to the Civil Disobedience Movement? During the First World War, Indian merchants and industrialists had made huge profits and become Some important dates powerful (see Chapter 5). Keen on expanding their business, they 1918-19 now reacted against colonial policies that restricted business activities. Distressed UP peasants organised by Baba They wanted protection against imports of foreign goods, and a Ramchandra. rupee-sterling foreign exchange ratio that would discourage imports. April 1919 To organise business interests, they formed the Indian Industrial Gandhian hartal against Rowlatt Act; Jallianwala and Commercial Congress in 1920 and the Federation of  the Indian Bagh massacre. Chamber of Commerce and Industries (FICCI) in 1927. Led by January 1921 prominent industrialists like Purshottamdas Thakurdas and Non-Cooperation and Khilafat movement G. D. Birla, the industrialists attacked colonial control over the Indian launched. economy, and supported the Civil Disobedience Movement when February 1922 it was first launched.  They gave financial assistance and refused to Chauri Chaura; Gandhiji withdraws Nonbuy or sell imported goods. Most businessmen came to see swaraj Cooperation movement. as a time when colonial restrictions on business would no longer May 1924 exist and trade and industry would flourish without constraints. But Alluri Sitarama Raju arrested ending a two-year after the failure of  the Round Table Conference, business groups armed tribal struggle. were no longer uniformly enthusiastic. They were apprehensive of December 1929 the spread of militant activities, and worried about prolonged Lahore Congress; Congress adopts the demand disruption of business, as well as of the growing influence of for ‘Purna Swaraj’. socialism amongst the younger members of  the Congress. 1930 The industrial working classes did not participate in the Civil Ambedkar establishes Depressed Classes Disobedience Movement in large numbers, except in the Nagpur Association. region. As the industrialists came closer to the Congress, workers March 1930 stayed aloof. But in spite of that, some workers did participate in Gandhiji begins Civil Disobedience Movement by the Civil Disobedience Movement, selectively adopting some of breaking salt law at Dandi. the ideas of the Gandhian programme, like boycott of foreign March 1931 goods, as part of their own movements against low wages and Gandhiji ends Civil Disobedience Movement. poor working conditions. There were strikes by railway workers in December 1931 1930 and dockworkers in 1932. In 1930 thousands of workers in Second Round Table Conference. Chotanagpur tin mines wore Gandhi caps and participated in protest 1932 rallies and boycott campaigns. But the Congress was reluctant to Civil Disobedience re-launched. include workers’ demands as part of  its programme of  struggle. It felt that this would alienate industrialists and divide the antiimperial forces. Another important feature of the Civil Disobedience Movement was the large-scale participation of  women. During Gandhiji’s salt march, thousands of women came out of their homes to listen to him. They participated in protest marches, manufactured salt, and 42 2024-25 India and the Contemporary World Fig. 9 – Women join nationalist processions. During the national movement, many women, for the first time in their lives, moved out of their homes on to a public arena. Amongst the marchers you can see many old women, and mothers with children in their arms. picketed foreign cloth and liquor shops. Many went to jail. In urban areas these women were from high-caste families; in rural areas they came from rich peasant households. Moved by Gandhiji’s call, they began to see service to the nation as a sacred duty of  women. Yet, this increased public role did not necessarily mean any radical change in the way the position of women was visualised. Gandhiji was convinced that it was the duty of women to look after home Discuss and hearth, be good mothers and good wives. And for a long time the Congress was reluctant to allow women to hold any position Why did various classes and groups of Indians of authority within the organisation. It was keen only on their participate in the Civil Disobedience Movement? symbolic presence. 3.3 The Limits of Civil Disobedience Not all social groups were moved by the abstract concept of swaraj. One such group was the nation’s ‘untouchables’, who from around the 1930s had begun to call themselves dalit or oppressed. For long the Congress had ignored the dalits, for fear of offending the sanatanis, the conservative high-caste Hindus. But Mahatma Gandhi declared that swaraj would not come for a hundred years if untouchability was not eliminated. He called the ‘untouchables’ harijan, 43 2024-25 National ism  in  India or the children of God, organised satyagraha to secure them entry into temples, and access to public wells, tanks, roads and schools. He himself cleaned toilets to dignify the work of the bhangi (the sweepers), and persuaded upper castes to change their heart and give up ‘the sin of untouchability’. But many dalit leaders were keen on a different political solution to the problems of the community. They began organising themselves, demanding reserved seats in educational institutions, and a separate electorate that would choose dalit members for