Chapter 11 Societal Impact 11.1 IntroductIon “I think computer viruses In recent years, the world around us has seen a lot should count as life. I think it of changes due to use of ‘Digital Technologies’. These says something about human changes have made a dramatic impact on our lives, nature that the only form of making things more convenient, faster, and easier to life we have created so far handle. In the past, a letter would take days to reach, is purely destructive. We’ve and every recipient would get his or her own copy created life in our own image.” and respond separately. Today, one can send and – Stephen Hawking receive emails to more than one person at a time. The instantaneous nature of electronic communications has made us more efficient and productive. From the banking industry to aviation, industrial production to e-commerce, especially with regard to the delivery of their goods and services, all are now dependent on the use of computers and digital technologies. Applications of digital technologies have redefined and evolved all spheres of human activities. Today more and more people are using digital technologies through smartphones, computers, etc., with the help of high speed Internet. Why did the digital technologies become so widespread? The introduction of personal computers (PCs) and Internet followed by smartphones has brought these technologies to the common man. While we reap the benefits of digital technologies, In this chapter these technologies can also be misused. Let’s look at » Introduction the impact of these technologies on our society and the » Digital Footprint best practices that can ensure a productive and safe » Digital Society and digital environment for us. Netizen 11.2 d » Data Protection IgItal FootprInts » Cyber Crime Have you ever searched online for any information? » Indian IT Act Have you ever purchased an online ticket, or responded to your friend’s email, or checked the score of a » Impact on Health 2024-25 Ch 11.indd   229 08-Apr-19   12:31:10 PM 230 Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi game online? Whenever we surf the Internet using Think and Reflect smartphones, tablets, computers, etc., we leave a trail Can your digital of data reflecting the activities performed by us online, footprints be used to which is our digital footprint. judge your attitude Our digital footprint can be created and used with and work ethics? or without our knowledge. It includes websites we visit, emails we send, and any information we submit online, etc., along with the computer’s IP address, location, and other device specific details. Such data could be used for targeted advertisement or could also be misused or exploited. Thus, it is good to be aware of the data trail we might be leaving behind. This awareness should make us cautious about what we write, upload or download or even browse online. There are two kinds of digital footprints we leave behind. Active digital footprints which includes data that we intentionally submit online. This would include emails we write, or responses or posts we make on different websites or mobile Apps, etc. The digital data trail we leave online unintentionally is called passive digital footprints. This includes the data generated when we visit a website, use a mobile App, browse Internet, etc., as shown in Figure 11.1. Everyone who is connected to the Internet may have a digital footprint. With more usage, the trail grows. On examining the browser settings, we can find out how it stores our browsing history, cookies, passwords, auto fills, and many other types of data. Besides browser, most of our digital footprints are stored in servers where the applications are hosted. We may not have access to remove or erase that data, neither do we have any control on how that data will be used. Therefore, once a data trail is generated, even if we later try to erase data about our online activities, the digital Figure 11.1: Exemplar web applications that result in digital footprints still remain. There is no guarantee that footprints digital footprints will be fully eliminated from the Internet. Therefore, we need to be more cautious while being online! All our online activities leave a data trace on the Internet as well as on the computing device that we use. This can be used to trace the user, his/her location, device and other usage details. 2024-25 Ch 11.indd   230 08-Apr-19   12:31:59 PM Societal impact 231 11.3 Digital Society anD netizen Activity 11.1 As our society is inclined towards using more and As a digital citizen, list more digital technologies, we end up managing most various services that of our tasks digitally. In this era of digital society, our you avail online. daily activities like communication, social networking, banking, shopping, entertainment, education, transportation, etc., are increasingly being driven by online transactions. Digital society thus reflects the growing trend of using digital technologies in all spheres of human activities. But while online, all of us need to be aware of how to conduct ourselves, how best to relate with others and what ethics, morals and values to maintain. Anyone who uses digital technology along with Internet is a digital citizen or a netizen. Being a good netizen means practicing safe, ethical and legal use of digital technology. A responsible netizen must abide by net etiquettes, communication etiquettes and social media etiquettes. 11.3.1 Net Etiquettes We follow certain etiquettes during our social interactions. Similarly, we need to exhibit proper manners and etiquettes while being online as shown in Figure 11.2. One should be ethical, respectful and responsible while surfing the Internet. (A) Be Ethical • No copyright violation: we should not use copyrighted materials without the permission of the creator or owner. As an ethical digital citizen, we need to be careful while streaming audio or video or downloading images and files from the Internet. We will learn more about Figure 11.2: Net Etiquettes copyright in Section 11.4. • Share the expertise: it is good to share information and knowledge on Internet so that others can access it. However, prior to sharing information, we need to be sure that we have sufficient knowledge on that topic. The information shared should be true and unambiguous. Also, in order to avoid 2024-25 Ch 11.indd   231 21-May-19   12:42:48 PM 232 Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi redundant information, we should verify that the information is not available already on Internet. (B) Be Respectful • Respect privacy: as good digital citizens we Remember!! have the right to privacy and the freedom of While surfing the Internet, personal expression. At the same time, we have we should be cautious to understand that other digital citizens also about our personal and have the same rights and freedoms. Our personal confidential data. communication with a digital citizen may include √ Think before sharing images, documents, files, etc., that are private credentials with others to both. We should respect this privacy and on an online platform. should not share those images, documents, files, √ Keep personal information safe and etc., with any other digital citizen without each protected through others’ consent. passwords. • Respect diversity: in a group or public forum, we should respect the diversity of the people in terms of knowledge, experience, culture and other aspects. (C) Be Responsible • Avoid cyber bullying: any insulting, degrading or intimidating online behaviour like repeated posting of rumours, giving threats online, posting the victim’s personal information, sexual harassment or comments aimed to publicly ridicule a victim is termed as cyber bullying. It implies repeatedly targeting someone with intentions to hurt or embarrass. Perhaps new or non-frequent users of the Internet feel that things done online have no effect in the real world. We need to realise that bullying online can have very serious implications on the other person (victim). Also, remember our actions can be traced back using our digital footprints. • Don’t feed the troll: an Internet troll is a person who deliberately sows discord on the Internet by starting quarrels or upsetting people, by posting inflammatory or off topic messages in an online community, just for amusement. Since trolls thrive Activity 11.2 on attention, the best way to discourage trolls is not to pay any attention to their comments. Find out how to report about an abusive or 11.3.2 Communication Etiquettes inappropriate post or about a sender in a Digital communication includes email, texting, instant social network? messaging, talking on the cell phone, audio or video 2024-25 Ch 11.indd   232 08-Apr-19   12:32:00 PM Societal impact 233 conferencing, posting on forums, social networking sites, etc. All these are Communication Etiquettes great ways to connect with people in order to exchange ideas, share data and knowledge. Good communication Be Be Precise Polite over email, chat room and other such forums require a digital citizen to abide by the communication etiquettes as Respect Respect shown in Figure 11.3. Time  Data Be Limits Credible (A) Be Precise • Respect time: we should not waste precious time in responding to Figure 11.3: Communication etiquettes unnecessary emails or comments unless they have some relevance for us. Also, we should not always expect an instant response as the recipient may have other priorities. • Respect data limits: For concerns related to data and bandwidth, very large attachments may be avoided. Rather send compressed files or link of the files through cloud shared storage like Google Drive, Microsoft OneDrive, Yahoo Dropbox, etc. (B) Be Polite Avoid Spam!! On receiving junk email Whether the communication is synchronous (happening (called Spam), neither in real time like chat, audio/video calls) or asynchronous reply nor open any (like email, forum post or comments), we should be attachment in such polite and non-aggressive in our communication. We email. should avoid being abusive even if we don’t agree with others’ point of view. (C) Be Credible We should be cautious while making a comment, No Permanent Deletion!! replying or writing an email or forum post as such acts We can post or comment decide our credibility over a period of time. That is how anything on Internet, and we decide to follow some particular person’s forum posts delete it later. while ignoring posts of other members of the forum. On √ But remember, it cannot be various discussion forums, we usually try to go through permanently deleted. the previous comments of a person and judge their It is recorded in our credibility before relying on that person’s comments. Digital Footprint. √ This is how many 11.3.3 Social Media Etiquettes culprits who spread In the current digital era, we are familiar with different hate, bully others or kinds social media and we may have an account on engage in criminal Facebook, Google+, Twitter, Instagram, Pinterest, or activities are traced and apprehended. the YouTube channel. Social media are websites or 2024-25 Ch 11.indd   233 08-Apr-19   12:32:00 PM 234 Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi Choose password wisely applications that enable their users to participate in social networking Know who you befriend by creating and sharing content with others in the community. These Beware of fake information platforms encourage users to share their thoughts and experiences through Think before you upload posts or pictures. In this way users can interact with other online users of Figure 11.4: Social media etiquettes those social media apps or channels. This is why the impact and outreach of social media has grown exponentially. It has begun to shape the outcome of politics, business, culture, education and more. In social media too, there are certain etiquettes we need to follow as shown in Don’t Meet Up!! Figure 11.4. √ Never arrange to (A) Be Secure meet an online friend •	 Choose password wisely: it is vital for social because it may not network users. News of breaching or leakage of user be safe. data from social network often attracts headlines. √ No matter how Users should be wary of such possibilities and genuine someone is appearing online, must know how to safeguard themselves and they might be their accounts. The minimum one can do is to pretending and have strong and frequently changed password. hiding their real Never share personal credentials like username identity. and password with others. •	 Know who you befriend: social networks usually encourage connecting with users (making friends), sometime even those whom we don’t know or have not met. However, we need to be careful while Think and Reflect befriending unknown people as their intentions possibly could be malicious and unsafe. Is having the same password for all your •	 Beware of fake information: fake news, messages accounts on different and posts are common in social networks. As a websites safe? user, we should be aware of them. With experience, we	should	be	able	to	figure	out	whether	a	news, message or post is genuine or fake. Thus, we should not blindly believe in everything that we come across on such platforms, we should apply our knowledge and experience to validate such news, message or post. (B) Be Reliable Play Safe!! •	 Think before uploading: we can upload almost Think carefully before anything on social network. However, remember sharing personal photos. that once uploaded, it is always there in the remote	server	even	if	we	delete	the	files.	Hence	we 2024-25 Ch 11.indd   234 07-May-19   9:45:46 AM Societal impact 235 need to be cautious while uploading or sending Activity 11.3 sensitive or confidential files which have a bearing on our privacy. Supose someone's email password is ‘tecnnology’ which is weak. Can 11.4 Data Protection you suggest a stronger password? In this digital age, data or information protection is mainly about the privacy of data stored digitally. Elements of data that can cause substantial harm, embarrassment, inconvenience and unfairness to an individual, if breached or compromised, is called sensitive data. Examples of sensitive data include biometric information, health information, financial information, or other personal documents, images or audios or videos. Privacy of sensitive data can be implemented by encryption, authentication, and other secure methods to ensure that such data is accessible only to the authorised user and is for a legitimate purpose. All over the world, each country has its own data protection policies (laws). These policies are legal Think and Reflect documents that provide guidelines to the user on Why should we always processing, storage and transmission of sensitive mention the source information. The motive behind implementation of from which we got an these policies is to ensure that sensitive information is idea or used resources appropriately protected from modification or disclosure. (text, image, audio, video, etc.) to prepare 11.4.1 Intellectual Property Right (IPR) a project or a writeup? When someone owns a house or a motorcycle, we say that the person owns that property. Similarly, if someone comes out with a new idea, this original idea is that person’s intellectual property. Intellectual Property refers to the inventions, literary and artistic expressions, designs and symbols, names and logos. The ownership of such concepts lies with the creator, or the holder of the intellectual property. This enables the creator or copyright owner to earn recognition or financial benefit by using their creation or invention. Intellectual Property is legally protected through copyrights, patents, trademarks,etc. (A) Copyright Copyright grants legal rights to creators for their original works like writing, photograph, audio recordings, video, sculptures, architectural works, computer software, and other creative works like literary and artistic work. 2024-25 Ch 11.indd   235 21-May-19   12:44:19 PM 236 Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi Copyrights are automatically granted to creators and authors. Copyright law gives the copyright holder a set Executing IPR: say for a of rights that they alone can avail legally. The rights software include right to copy (reproduce) a work, right to create √ Code of the software derivative works based upon it, right to distribute copies will be protected by of the work to the public, and right to publicly display a copyright or perform the work. It prevents others from copying, √ Functional using or selling the work. For example, writer Rudyard expression of the idea will be protected by a Kipling holds the copyright to his novel, ‘The Jungle patent Book’, which tells the story of Mowgli, the jungle boy. √ The name and logo It would be an infringement of the writer’s copyright if of the software someone used parts of the novel without permission. To will come under a use other’s copyrighted material, one needs to obtain a registered trademark license from them. (B) Patent A patent is usually granted for inventions. Unlike copyright, the inventor needs to apply (file) for patenting the invention. When a patent is granted, the owner gets an exclusive right to prevent others from using, selling, or distributing the protected invention. Patent gives full control to the patentee to decide whether or how the invention can be used by others. Thus it encourages inventors to share their scientific or technological findings with others. A patent protects an invention for 20 years, after which it can be freely used. Recognition and/or financial benefit foster the right environment, and provide motivation for more creativity and innovation. (C) Trademark Trademark includes any visual symbol, word, name, design, slogan, label, etc., that distinguishes the brand or commercial enterprise, from other brands or commercial enterprises. For example, no company other than Nike can use the Nike brand to sell shoes or clothes. It also prevents others from using a confusingly similar mark, including words or phrases. For example, confusing brands like “Nikke” cannot be used. However, it may be possible to apply for the Nike trademark for unrelated goods like notebooks. 11.4.2 Violation of IPR Violation of intellectual property right may happen in one of the following ways: 2024-25 Ch 11.indd   236 08-Apr-19   12:32:00 PM Societal impact 237 (A) Plagiarism Activity 11.4 With the availability of Internet, we can instantly copy or share text, pictures and videos. Presenting someone Explore the follouing websites to know about else’s idea or work as one’s own idea or work is called open/public licensing: plagiarism. If we copy some contents from Internet, (i) creativecommons.org but do not mention the source or the original creator, for cc, and then it is considered as an act of plagiarism. Further, if (ii) gnu.org for GNU GPL someone derives an idea or a product from an already existing idea or product, but instead presents it a new idea, then also it is plagiarism. It is a serious ethical offense and sometimes considered as an act of fraud. Even if we take contents that are open for public use, we should cite the author or source to avoid plagiarism. (B)  Copyright Infringement Copyright infringement is when we use other person’s work without obtaining their permission to use or we have not paid for it, if it is being sold. Suppose we download an image from the Internet and use it in our project. But if the owner of the copyright of the image does not permit its free usage, then using such an image even after giving reference of the image in our project Beware!! is a violation of copyright. Just because it is on the √ Plagiarism means Internet, does not mean that it is free for use. Hence, using other’s work check the copyright status of writer’s work before using and not giving it to avoid plagiarism. adequate citation for use. (C) Trademark Infringement √ Copyright Trademark Infringement means unauthorised use of infringement means other’s trademark on products and services. An owner using another of a trademark may commence legal proceedings against person’s work, without permission someone who infringes its registered trademark. or without paying for 11.4.3 Public Access and Open Source Software it, if it is being sold. Copyright sometimes put restriction on the usage of the copyrighted works by anyone else. If others are allowed to use and built upon the existing work, it will encourage collaboration and would result in new innovations in the same direction. Licenses provide rules and guidelines for others to use the existing work. When authors share their copyrighted works with others under public license, it allows others to use and even modify the content. Open source licenses help others to contribute to existing work or project without seeking special individual permission to do so. 2024-25 Ch 11.indd   237 21-May-19   12:45:19 PM 238 Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi The GNU General public license (GPL) and the Creative Commons (CC) are two popular categories of public licenses. CC is used for all kind of creative works like websites, music, film, literature, etc. CC enables the free distribution of an otherwise copyrighted work. It is used when an author wants to give people the right to share, use and build upon a work that they have created. GPL is primarily designed for providing public licence to a software. GNU GPL is another free software license, which provides end users the freedom to run, study, share and modify the software, besides getting regular updates. Remember Users or companies who distribute GPL license √ CC licenses are works may charge a fee for copies or give them free of a set of copyright charge. This distinguishes the GPL license from freeware licenses that give the recipients, rights software licenses like Skype, Adobe Acrobat reader, to copy, modify and etc. that allow copying for personal use but prohibit redistribute the commercial distribution, or proprietary licenses where creative material, but copying is prohibited by copyright law. giving the authors, the liberty to decide Many of the proprietary software that we use are sold the conditions commercially and their program code (source code) are of licensing. not shared or distributed. However, there are certain √ GPL is the most software available freely for anyone and their source widely used free code is also open for anyone to access, modify, correct software license which grants the and improve. Free and open source software (FOSS) recipients, rights to has a large community of users and developers who are copy, modify and contributing continuously towards adding new features redistribute the software and that or improving the existing features. For example, Linux the same rights kernel-based operating systems like Ubuntu and Fedora are preserved in all come under FOSS. Some of the popular FOSS tools are derivative works. office packages, like Libre Office, browser like Mozilla Firefox, etc. Software piracy is the unauthorised use or distribution of software. Those who purchase a license for a copy of the software do not have the rights to make additional copies without the permission of the copyright owner. It amounts to copyright infringement regardless of whether it is done for sale, for free distribution or for copier’s own use. One should avoid software piracy. Using a pirated software not only degrades the performance of a computer system, but also affects the software industry which in turn affects the economy of a country. 2024-25 Ch 11.indd   238 08-Apr-19   12:32:00 PM Societal impact 239 11.5 cyber crIme Criminal activities or offences carried out in a digital environment can be considered as cyber crime. In such crimes, either the computer itself is the target or the computer is used as a tool to commit a crime. Cyber crimes are carried out against either an individual, or a group, or an organisation or even against a country, with the intent to directly or indirectly cause physical harm, financial loss or mental harassment. A cyber criminal attacks a computer or a network to reach other computers in order to disable or damage data or services. Apart from this, a cyber criminal may spread viruses and other malwares in order to steal private and confidential data for blackmailing and extortion. A computer virus is some lines of malicious code that can copy itself and can have detrimental effect on the computers, by destroying data or corrupting the system. Similarly, malware is a software designed to specifically gain unauthorised Remember!! access to computer systems. The nature of criminal Cyber crime is defined activities are alarmingly increasing day-by-day, with as a crime in which frequent reports of hacking, ransomware attacks, computer is the medium denial-of-service, phishing, email fraud, banking fraud of crime (hacking, phishing, spamming), or and identity theft. the computer is used as a tool to commit crimes 11.5.1 Hacking (extortion, data breaches, Hacking is the act of unauthorised access to a computer, theft). computer network or any digital system. Hackers usually have technical expertise of the hardware and software. They look for bugs to exploit and break into the system. Hacking, when done with a positive intent, is called ethical hacking. Such ethical hackers are known as white hat hackers. They are specialists in exploring any vulnerability or loophole during testing of the software. Thus, they help in improving the security of a software. An ethical hacker may exploit a website in order to discover its security loopholes or vulnerabilities. He then reports his findings to the website owner. Thus, ethical hacking is actually preparing the owner against any cyber attack. Activity 11.5 A non-ethical hacker is the one who tries to gain How can you unauthorised access to computers or networks in order unsubscribe from a to steal sensitive data with the intent to damage or mail group or block an bring down systems. They are called black hat hackers email sender? 2024-25 Ch 11.indd   239 08-Apr-19   12:32:00 PM 240 Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi or crackers. Their primary focus is on security cracking and data stealing. They use their skill for illegal or Beware !! malicious purposes. Such hackers try to break through system securities for identity theft, monetary gain, to Accepting links from untrusted emails can be bring a competitor or rival site down, to leak sensitive hazardous, as they may information, etc. potentially contain a virus or link to malicious 11.5.2 Phishing and Fraud Emails website. We should ensure Phishing is an unlawful activity where fake websites or to open any email link or attachment only when it is emails that look original or authentic are presented to from a trusted source and the user to fraudulently collect sensitive and personal doesn’t look doubtful. details, particularly usernames, passwords, banking and credit card details. The most common phishing method is through email spoofing where a fake or forged email address is used and the user presumes it to be from an authentic source. So you might get an email from an address that looks similar to your bank or educational institution, asking for your information, but if you look carefully you will see their URL address is fake. They will often use logo’s of the original, making them difficult to detect from the real! Phishing attempts through phone calls or text messages are also common these days. (A) Identity Theft Identity thieves increasingly use personal information stolen from computers or computer networks, to commit fraud by using the data gained unlawfully. A user’s identifiable personal data like demographic details, email ID, banking credentials, passport, PAN, Aadhaar number and various such personal data are stolen and misused by the hacker on behalf of the victim. This is one type of phishing attack where the intention is largely for monetary gain. There can be many ways in which the criminal takes advantage of an individual’s stolen identity. Given below are a few examples: • Financial identity theft: when the stolen identity is used for financial gain. • Criminal identity theft: criminals use a victim’s stolen identity to avoid detection of their true identity. • Medical identity theft: criminals can seek medical drugs or treatment using a stolen identity. 2024-25 Ch 11.indd   240 08-Apr-19   12:32:00 PM Societal impact 241 11.5.3 Ransomware Activity 11.6 This is another kind of cyber crime where the attacker Explore and find out gains access to the computer and blocks the user from how to file a complaint accessing, usually by encrypting the data. The attacker with the cyber cell in blackmails the victim to pay for getting access to the your area. data, or sometimes threaten to publish personal and sensitive information or photographs unless a ransom is paid. Ransomware can get downloaded when the users visit any malicious or unsecure websites or download software from doubtful repositories. Some ransomware are sent as email attachments in spam mails. It can also reach our system when we click on a malicious advertisement on the Internet. 11.5.4 Combatting and Preventing Cyber Crime The challenges of cyber crime can be mitigated with the twin approach of being alert and taking legal help. Following points can be considered as safety measures to reduce the risk of cyber crime: • Take regular backup of important data • Use an antivirus software and keep it updated always • Avoid installing pirated software. Always download software from known and secure (HTTPS) sites • Always update the system software which include the Internet browser and other application software • Do not visit or download anything from untrusted websites • Usually the browser alerts users about doubtful websites whose security certificate could not be verified; avoid visiting such sites • Use strong password for web login, and change it periodically. Do not use same password for all the websites. Use different combinations of alphanumeric characters including special characters. Ignore common words or names in password • While using someone else’s computer, don’t allow browser to save password or auto fill data, and try to browse in your private browser window 2024-25 Ch 11.indd   241 08-Apr-19   12:32:00 PM 242 Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi • For an unknown site, do not agree to use cookies when asked for, through a Yes/No option. • Perform online transaction like shopping, ticketing, and other such services only through well-known and secure sites • Always secure wireless network at home with strong password and regularly change it. 11.6 IndIan InFormatIon technology act (It act) With the growth of Internet, many cases of cyber crimes, Digital signatures are frauds, cyber attacks and cyber bullying are reported. the digital equivalent of a paper certificate. Digital The nature of fraudulent activities and crimes keeps signatures work on a changing. To deal with such menaces, many countries unique digital ID issued by a Certified Authority have come up with legal measures for protection of (CA) to the user. Signing a sensitive personal data and to safeguard the rights of document digitally means attaching that user's Internet users. The Government of India’s Information identity which can be used Technology Act, 2000 (also known as IT Act), amended in to authenticate. 2008, provides guidelines to the user on the processing, A licensed CA who has been granted a license to storage and transmission of sensitive information. issue it under section 24 of In many Indian states, there are cyber cells in police the indian IT-Act 2000, can issue the digital signature. stations where one can report any cyber crime. The act provides legal framework for electronic governance by giving recognition to electronic records and digital signatures. The act outlines cyber crimes and penalties for them. Cyber Appellate Tribunal has been established to resolve disputes arising from cyber crime, such as tampering with computer source documents, hacking the computer system, using password of another person, publishing sensitive personal data of others without their consent, etc. The act is needed so that people can perform transactions over the Internet through credit cards without fear of misuse. Not only people, the act empowers government departments also to accept Think and Reflect filing, creation and storage of official documents in the digital format. Do you follow precautions to stay healthy — physically, 11.7 Impact on health mentally as well as emotionally while As digital technologies have penetrated into different using digital fields, we are spending more time in front of screens, be technologies? it mobile, laptop, desktop, television, gaming console, 2024-25 Ch 11.indd   242 08-Apr-19   12:32:00 PM Societal impact 243 music or sound device. But interacting in an improper posture can be bad for us — both physically, and mentally. Besides, spending too much time on Device Safety: Ensures Internet can be addictive and can have a negative Good Health of a impact on our physical and psychological well being. Computer System However, these health concerns can be addressed √ Regularly clean it to some extent by taking care of the way we position to keep the dust such devices and the way we position our posture. off. Use a liquid solution specifically Ergonomics is a branch of science that deals with formulated for designing or arranging workplaces including the the cleaning of furniture, equipments and systems so that it becomes electronic screens. safe and comfortable for the user. Ergonomics helps √ Wipe monitor’s us in reducing the strain on our bodies — including screen often using the fatigue and injuries due to prolonged use. the regular microfibre soft cloth (the one When we continuously look at the screen for used for spectacles). watching, typing, chatting or playing games, our √ Keep it away from eyes are continuously exposed to the glare coming direct heat, sunlight from the screens. Looking at small handheld and put it in a devices makes it worse. Eye strain is a symptom room with enough ventilation for air commonly complained by users of digital devices. circulation. √ Do not eat food Viewing Distance 19”-24” or drink over the keyboard. Food Viewi crumbs that fall into ng Angl the gaps between e 300 the keys or spilled over liquid can cause issues to the devices. Wrist Straight Lumber 900 Support for Lower Back Seat Back Angle 900 900 Knee Angle Adjustable Seat 23”-28” Feet on floor Height footrest for shorter people Figure 11.5: Correct posture while sitting in front of a computer 2024-25 Ch 11.indd   243 15-Jun-21   11:19:58 AM 244 Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi Ergonomically maintaining the viewing distance and angle, along with the position can be of some help. Figure 11.5 shows the posture to be maintained in Maintain a Balance!! order to avoid fatigue caused due to prolonged use of Enjoy the exciting world of computer system and other digital devices. However, digital devices in tandem with other pursuits to get rid of dry, watering, or itchy eyes, it is better to of thrilling sports and periodically focus on distant objects, and take a break hobbies. Online friends for outdoor activities. are good, but spending Bad posture, backaches, neck and shoulder pains time with friends in real life is very fulfilling. Often can be prevented by arranging the workspace as the wholesome nature of recommended by ergonomics. Overuse of keyboards real interactions cannot (be it physical keyboard or touchscreen-based virtual be compared to just online keyboard) not aligned ergonomically, can give rise to a social networking. painful condition of wrists and fingers, and may require medical help in the long run. Stress, physical fatigue and obesity are the other related impacts the body may face if one spends too much time using digital devices. summary • Digital footprint is the trail of data we leave behind when we visit any website (or use any online application or portal) to fill-in data or perform any transaction. • A user of digital technology needs to follow certain etiquettes like net-etiquettes, communicationetiquettes and social media-etiquettes. • Net-etiquette includes avoiding copyright violations, respecting privacy and diversity of users, and avoiding cyber bullies and cyber trolls, besides sharing of expertise. • Communication-etiquette requires us to be precise and polite in our conversation so that we remain credible through our remarks and comments. • While using social media, one needs to take care of security through password, be aware of fake information and be careful while befriending unknowns. Care must be taken while sharing anything on social media as it may create havoc if being mishandled, particularly our personal, sensitive information. • Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) help in data protection through copyrights, patents and trademarks. There are both ethical and legal 2024-25 Ch 11.indd   244 08-Apr-19   12:32:01 PM Societal impact 245 aspects of violating IPR. A good digital citizen notes should avoid plagiarism, copyright infringement and trademark infringement.