6 Respiration in Organisms One day Boojho was eagerly Therefore, all living organisms respire waiting to meet his to get energy from food. During grandparents who were coming breathing, we breathe in air. You know to the town after a year. He was in a real that air contains oxygen. We breathe out hurry as he wanted to receive them at the air which is rich in carbon dioxide. The bus-stop. He ran fast and reached the air we breathe in is transported to all bus-stop in a few minutes. He was parts of the body and ultimately to each breathing rapidly. His grandmother asked cell. In  the cells, oxygen in the air helps him why he was breathing so fast. Boojho in the breakdown of food. The process told her that he came running all the way. of breakdown of food in the cell with the But the question got stuck in his mind. release of energy is called cellular He wondered why running makes a respiration. Cellular respiration takes person breathe faster. The answer to place in the cells of all organisms. Boojho’s question lies in understanding In the cell, the food (glucose) is broken why we breathe. Breathing is a part of down into carbon dioxide and water using respiration. Let us learn about respiration. oxygen. When breakdown of glucose occurs with the use of oxygen it is called 6.1 WHY DO WE RESPIRE? aerobic respiration. Food can also be In Chapter 2 you learnt that all broken down, without using oxygen. This organisms are made of small is called anaerobic respiration. microscopic units called cells. A cell is Breakdown of food releases energy. the smallest structural and functional unit of an organism. Each cell of an organism performs certain functions You should know that there are some such as nutrition, transport, excretion organisms such as yeast that can survive and reproduction. To perform these in the absence of air. They are called functions, the cell needs energy. Even anaerobes. They get energy through when we are eating, sleeping or reading anaerobic respiration. In the absence of we require energy. But, where does this oxygen, glucose breaks down into alcohol energy come from? Can you say why and carbon dioxide, as given below: your parents insist that you should eat regularly? The food has stored energy, which is released during respiration. Reprint 2024-25 Yeasts are single-celled organisms. Have you ever wondered why you get They respire anaerobically and during muscle cramps after heavy exercise? The this process yield alcohol. They are, cramps occur when muscle cells respire therefore, used to make wine and beer. anaerobically. The partial breakdown of glucose produces lactic acid. The Our muscle cells can also respire accumulation of lactic acid causes muscle anaerobically, but only for a short time, cramps. We get relief from cramps after a when there is a temporary deficiency of hot water bath or a massage. Can you oxygen. During heavy exercise, fast guess why it is so? Hot water bath or running (Fig. 6.1), cycling, walking for massage improves circulation of blood. many hours or heavy weight lifting, the As a result, the supply of oxygen to the demand for energy is high. But the muscle cells increases. The increase in supply of oxygen to produce the energy the supply of oxygen results in the is limited. Then anaerobic respiration complete breakdown of lactic acid into takes places in the muscle cells to fulfil carbon dioxide and water. the demand of energy: 6.2 BREATHING Activity 6.1 CAUTION Do this activity under the supervision of your teacher. Close your nostrils and mouth tightly and look at a watch. What did you feel after some time? How long were you able to keep both of them closed? Note down the time for which you could hold your breath (Fig. 6.2). So, now you know that you cannot survive for long without breathing. Breathing means taking in air rich in oxygen and giving out air rich in carbon dioxide with the help of respiratory organs. The taking in of air rich in oxygen into the body is called inhalation and giving out of air rich in Fig. 6.1  During exercise, some muscles may carbon dioxide is known as exhalation. respire anaerobically It is a continuous process which goes 58 SCIENCE Reprint 2024-25 on all the time and throughout the life you like to find out your breathing rate? of an organism. Do you want to know whether it is The number of times a person constant or it changes according to the breathes in a minute is termed as the requirement of oxygen by the body? Let breathing rate. During breathing us find out by doing the following inhalation and exhalation take place activity. alternately. A breath means one Activity 6.2 inhalation plus one exhalation. Would Generally we are not aware that we are breathing. However, if you try you can count your rate of breathing. Breathe in and out normally. Find out how many times you breathe in and breathe out in a minute? Did you inhale the same number of times as you exhaled? Now count your breathing rate (number of breaths/minute) after brisk walk and after running. Record your breathing Fig. 6.2   Holding breath rate as soon as you finish and also after complete rest. Tabulate your findings and compare your breathing rates under Boojho noticed that when he different conditions with those of your released his breath after holding classmates. it for some time, he had to From the above activity, you must breathe heavily. Can you tell have realised that whenever a person him why it was so? needs extra energy, he/she breathes faster. As a result more oxygen is Table 6.1 Changes in breathing rate under different conditions Name of the classmate Breathing rate Normal After a brisk After running At rest walk for 10 fast 100 m minutes Self RESPIRATION IN ORGANISMS 59 Reprint 2024-25 On an average, an adult human being at rest breathes in and out 15–18 times in a minute. During heavy Paheli wants to know why exercise, the breathing rate can we yawn when we are increase upto 25 times per minute. sleepy or drowsy. While we exercise, not only do we breathe fast, we also take deep breaths and thus inhale more oxygen. day. Can you say in which activity, the rate of breathing will be the slowest and supplied to our cells. It speeds up in which it will be the fastest? Assign the breakdown of food and more numbers to the pictures in the order of energy is released. Does this explain increasing rate of breathing according why do we fee l  hungry  a f ter  a to your experience. physical activity? When you feel drowsy, does your 6.3 HOW DO WE BREATHE? breathing rate slow down? Does your Let us now learn about the mechanism body receive sufficient oxygen? of breathing. Normally we take in air Activity 6.3 through our nostrils. When we inhale air, it passes through our nostrils into Figure 6.3 shows the various activities the nasal cavity. From the nasal cavity, carried out by a person during a normal the air reaches our lungs through the windpipe. Lungs are present in the chest cavity (Fig. 6.4). This cavity is surrounded by ribs on the sides. A large, muscular sheet called diaphragm forms the floor of the chest cavity (Fig. 6.4). Breathing involves the movement of the diaphragm and the rib cage. During inhalation, ribs move up and outwards and diaphragm moves down. This movement increases space in our chest cavity and air rushes into the lungs. The lungs get filled with air. During exhalation, ribs move down and inwards, while diaphragm moves up to its former position. This reduces the size of the chest cavity and air is pushed out Fig. 6.3   Variation in the breathing rate during of the lungs (Fig. 6.5). These movements different activities in our body can be felt easily. Take a 60 SCIENCE Reprint 2024-25 deep breath. Keep your palm on the Smoking damages lungs. Smoking is abdomen, feel the movement of also linked to cancer. It must be abdomen. What do you find? avoided. After having learnt that during breathing there are changes in the size could expand it the maximum. How of the chest cavity, children got involved about doing this activity in the class in the chest expansion competition. with your classmates? Everyone was boasting that she/he Nasal passage Pharynx Oral cavity Trachea Lungs Ribs Diaphragm Fig 6.4 Human respiratory system The air around us has various types of unwanted particles, such as smoke, dust, pollens, etc. When we inhale, the particles get trapped in the hair present in our nasal cavity. However, sometimes these particles may get past the hair in the nasal cavity. This may irritate the lining of the cavity, as a result of which we sneeze. Sneezing expels these foreign particles from the inhaled air and a dustfree, clean air enters our body. TAKE CARE: When you sneeze, you should cover your nose so that the foreign particles you expel are not inhaled by other persons. RESPIRATION IN ORGANISMS 61 Reprint 2024-25 Activity 6.4 Activity 6.5 Take a deep breath. Measure the size Take a wide plastic bottle. Remove the of the chest with a measuring tape bottom. Get a Y-shaped glass or plastic (Fig. 6.6) and record your observations tube. Make a hole in the lid so that the in Table 6.2. Measure the size of the tube may pass through it. To the forked chest again when expanded and end of the tube fix two deflated balloons. indicate which classmate shows the Introduce the tube into the bottle as maximum expansion of the chest. shown in Fig. 6.7. Now cap the bottle. We can understand the mechanism Seal it to make it airtight. To the open of breathing by a simple model. base of the bottle tie a thin rubber or plastic sheet using a large rubber band. Air is drawn in Air forced out Ribs move Ribs move out back Diaphragm Diaphragm moves down moves back (a) Inhalation (b) Exhalation Fig. 6.5  Mechanism of breathing in human beings Table 6.2: Effect of breathing on the chest size of some classmates Name of the Size of the chest (cm) classmate During inhalation During exhalation Difference in size 62 SCIENCE Reprint 2024-25 the hole in the lid in such a way that it dips in lime water. Now blow gently through the straw a few times (Fig. 6.8). Is there a change in the appearance of lime water? Can you explain this change on the basis of what you learnt in Chapter 5? You are aware that air we inhale or exhale is a mixture of gases. What do we exhale? Do we exhale only carbon dioxide or a mixture of gases along with it? You must have also observed that if you exhale on a mirror, a film of Fig. 6.6  Measuring chest size moisture appears on its surface. From where do these droplets come? To understand the expansion of the lungs, pull the rubber sheet from the base downwards and watch the balloons. Next, push the rubber/plastic sheet up Boojho wants to know how and observe the balloons. Did you see much air a person can hold in any changes in the balloons? the lungs. What do the balloons in this model represent? What does the rubber sheet represent? Now, you should be able to explain the mechanism of breathing. Plastic bottle 6.4 WHAT DO WE BREATHE OUT? Activity 6.6 Balloons Take a slender, clean test tube or a Ruber glass/plastic bottle. Make a hole in its sheet lid and fix it on the bottle.  Pour some freshly prepared lime water in the Fig 6.7  Model to show test-tube. Insert a plastic straw through mechanism of breathing Breathe for Better Life Regular traditional breathing exercise (pranayama) can increase the capacity of lungs to take in more air. Thus more oxygen can be supplied to the body cells resulting in release of more energy. RESPIRATION IN ORGANISMS 63 Reprint 2024-25 Boojho wants to know if cockroaches, snails, fish, earthworms, ants and mosquitoes also have lungs. Straw These openings are called spiracles (Fig. 6.9). Insects have a network of air tubes called tracheae for gas exchange. Oxygen rich air rushes through spiracles into the tracheal tubes, diffuses into the body tissue, and reaches every cell of Lime water the body. Similarly, carbon dioxide from Fig. 6.8  Effect of exhaled air on lime water the cells goes into the tracheal tubes and moves out through spiracles. These air The percentage of oxygen and carbon tubes or tracheae are found only in dioxide in inhaled and exhaled air. insects and not in any other group of Inhaled air Exhaled air animals. 21% oxygen 16.4% oxygen Tracheae Lungs 0.04% carbon 4.4% carbon dioxide dioxide 6.5 BREATHING IN OTHER ANIMALS Animals such as elephants, lions, cows, Fig.6.9  Tracheal system goats, frogs, lizards, snakes, birds, have Earthworm: Recall from Chapter 6 of lungs in their chest cavities like the Class VI that earthworms breathe human beings. through their skins. The skin of an How do other organisms breathe? Do earthworm feels moist and slimy on they also have lungs like those of human touching. Gases can easily pass through beings? Let us find out. them. Though frogs have a pair of lungs Cockroach: A cockroach has small like human beings, they can also openings on the sides of its body. Other breathe through their skin, which is insects also have similar openings. moist and slippery. 64 SCIENCE Reprint 2024-25 dioxide. In the cells oxygen is used to break down glucose into carbon dioxide and water as in other organisms. In plants each part can independently take Boojho has seen in television in oxygen from the air and give out programmes that whales and dolphins often come up to the carbon dioxide. You have already learnt in Chapter 1 that the leaves of the plants water surface. They even release have tiny pores called stomata for a fountain of water sometimes while moving upwards. Why do exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide. they do so? Paheli wants to know whether 6.6 BREATHING UNDER WATER roots, which are underground Can we breathe and survive in water? also take in oxygen? If so, how? There are many organisms which live in water. How do they breathe under water? You have studied in Class VI that gills in fish help them to use oxygen Like all other living cells of the dissolved in water. Gills are projections plants, the root cells also need of the skin. You may wonder how gills oxygen to generate energy. Roots take help in breathing. Gills are well supplied up air from the air spaces present with blood vessels (Fig. 6.10) for between the soil particles (Fig. 6.11). exchange of gases. Gills Soil particles Root hair Fig. 6.10  Breathing organs in fish Air space 6.7 DO PLANTS ALSO RESPIRE? Like other living organisms, plants also respire for their survival as you have learnt in Class VI. They also take in oxygen from the air and give out carbon Fig. 6.11  Roots absorb air from the soil RESPIRATION IN ORGANISMS 65 Reprint 2024-25 Can you guess what would happen process. All living organisms need if a potted plant is overwatered? to respire to get the energy needed In this chapter you learnt for their survival. that respiration is a vital biological Keywords Aerobic respiration Diaphragm Inhalation Anaerobic respiration Exhalation Spiracles Breathing rate Gills Tracheae Cellular respiration Lungs Ribs What you have learnt  Respiration is essential for survival of living organisms. It releases energy from the food.  The oxygen we inhale is used to breakdown glucose into carbon dioxide and water. Energy is released in the process.  The breakdown of glucose occurs in the cells of an organism (cellular respiration).  If the food is broken down with the use of oxygen, it is called aerobic respiration. If the breakdown occurs without the use of oxygen, the respiration is called anaerobic respiration.  During heavy exercise when the supply of oxygen to our muscle cells is insufficient, food breakdown is by anaerobic respiration.  Breathing is a part of the process of respiration during which an organism takes in the oxygen-rich air and gives out air rich in carbon dioxide. The respiratory organs for the exchange of gases vary in different organisms.  During inhalation, our lungs expand and then come back to the original state as the air moves out during exhalation.  Increased physical activity enhances the rate of breathing.  In animals like cow, buffalo, dog and cat the respiratory organs and the process of breathing are similar to those in humans.  In earthworm, the exchange of gases occurs through the moist skin. In fishes it takes place through gills and in insects through the tracheae.  In a plant the roots take in air present in the soil. Leaves have tiny pores called stomata through which they exchange gases. The breakdown of glucose in the plant cells is similar to that in other living beings. 66 SCIENCE Reprint 2024-25 Exercises 1. Why does an athlete breathe faster and deeper than usual after finishing the race? 2. List the similarities and differences between aerobic and anaerobic respiration. 3. Why do we often sneeze when we inhale a lot of dust-laden air? 4. Take three test-tubes. Fill ¾th of each with water. Label them A, B and C. Keep a snail in test-tube A, a water plant in test-tube B and in C, keep snail and plant both. Which test-tube would have the highest concentration of CO ? 2 5. Tick the correct answer: (a) In cockroaches, air enters the body through (i) lungs (ii) gills (iii) spiracles (iv) skin (b) During heavy exercise, we get cramps in the legs due to the accumulation of (i) carbon dioxide (ii) lactic acid (iii) alcohol (iv) water (c) Normal range of breathing rate per minute in an average adult person at rest is: (i) 9–12 (ii) 15–18 (iii) 21–24 (iv) 30–33 (d) During exhalation, the ribs (i) move outwards (ii) move downwards (iii) move upwards (iv) do not move at all 6. Match the items in Column I with those in Column II: Column I Column II (a) Yeast (i) Earthworm (b) Diaphragm (ii) Gills (c) Skin (iii) Alcohol (d) Leaves (iv) Chest cavity (e) Fish (v) Stomata (f) Frog (vi) Lungs and skin (vii) Tracheae RESPIRATION IN ORGANISMS 67 Reprint 2024-25 7. Mark ‘T’ if the statement is true and ‘F’ if it is false: (i) During heavy exercise the breathing rate of a person slows down. (T/F) (ii) Plants carry out photosynthesis only during the day and respiration only at night. (T/F) (iii) Frogs breathe through their skins as well as their lungs. (T/F) (iv) The fishes have lungs for respiration. (T/F) (v) The size of the chest cavity increases during inhalation. (T/F) 8. Given below is a square of letters in which are hidden different words related to respiration in organisms. These words may be present in any direction — upwards, downwards, or along the diagonals. Find the words for your respiratory system. Clues about those words are given below the square. S V M P L U N G S C Z G Q W X N T L R M A T I D O T C I Y R X Y M S R A B R H I A N T A Y S T P T B Z R C E M I A M T S I H A S P I R A C L E S N E D K J N S A T (i) The air tubes of insects (ii) Skeletal structures surrounding chest cavity (iii) Muscular floor of chest cavity (iv) Tiny pores on the surface of leaf (v) Small openings on the sides of the body of an insect (vi) The respiratory organs of human beings (vii) The openings through which we inhale (viii) An anaerobic organism (ix) An organism with tracheal system 9. The mountaineers carry oxygen with them because: (a) At an altitude of more than 5 km there is no air. 68 SCIENCE Reprint 2024-25 (b) The amount of air available to a person is less than that available on the ground. (c) The temperature of air is higher than that on the ground. (d) The pressure of air is higher than that on the ground. Extended Learning — Activities and Projects 1. Observe fish in an aquarium. You will find flap like structures on both sides of their heads. These are flaps which cover the gills. These flaps open and close alternately. On the basis of these observations, explain the process of respiration in the fish. 2. Visit a local doctor. Learn about the harmful effects of smoking. You can also collect material on this topic from other sources. You can seek help of your teacher or parents. Find out the percentage of people of your area who smoke. If you have a smoker in your family, confront him with the material that you have collected. 3. Visit a doctor. Find out about artificial respiration. Ask the doctor: (a) When does a person need artificial respiration? (b) Does the person need to be kept on artificial respiration temporarily or permanently? (c) From where can the person get supply of oxygen for artificial respiration? 4. Measure the breathing rate of the members of your family and some of your friends. Investigate: (c) If the breathing rate of children is different from that of adults. (d) If the breathing rate of males is different from that of females. If there is a difference in any of these cases, try to find the reason. Did you know? For us oxygen is essential, but for those organisms which do not use it, oxygen is toxic. In fact, for humans and other organisms it may be dangerous to breathe pure oxygen for long. RESPIRATION IN ORGANISMS 69 Reprint 2024-25