5 Physical and Chemical Changes Every day you come across many 5.1  PHYSICAL CHANGES changes in your surroundings. These changes may involve one Activity 5.1 or more substances.  For example, your Cut a piece of paper in four square mother may ask you to dissolve sugar pieces. Cut each square piece further in water to make a cold drink. Making a into four square pieces.  Lay these pieces sugar solution is a change. Similarly, on the floor or a table so that the pieces setting curd from milk is a change. acquire the shape of the original piece Sometimes milk becomes sour.  Souring of paper (Fig. 5.1). of milk is a change. Stretched rubber Obviously, you cannot join the pieces band also represents a change. back to make the original piece, but is Make a list of ten changes you have there a change in the property of the noticed around you. paper? In this chapter we shall perform some activities and study the nature of these Activity 5.2 changes.  Broadly, these changes are of Collect the chalk dust lying on the floor two kinds, physical and chemical. near the chalkboard in your classroom. Or, crush a small piece of chalk into dust. Add a little water to the dust to make a paste. Roll it into the shape of a piece of chalk. Let it dry. Did you recover chalk from the dust? Activity 5.3 Take some ice in a glass or plastic tumbler. Melt a small portion of ice by placing the tumbler in the sun. You have now a mixture of ice and water. Now place the tumbler in a freezing mixture (ice plus common salt). Does the water become solid ice once Fig. 5.1   Paper pieces again? Reprint 2024-25 Activity 5.4 5.3 and 5.4, water changed its state (from solid to liquid, or from gas to liquid). In Boil some water in a container. Do you Activity 5.5, the hack-saw blade see the steam rising from the surface of changed colour on heating. water? Hold an inverted pan by its Properties such as shape, size, colour handle over the steam at some distance and state of a substance are called its from the boiling water.  Observe the physical properties. A change in which inner surface of the pan. a substance undergoes a change in its Do you see any droplet of water physical properties is called a physical there? change. A physical change is generally Activity 5.5 reversible. In such a change no new CAUTION substance is formed. Let us now consider the other kind Be careful while handling a flame. of change. Hold a used hack-saw blade with a pair of tongs. Keep the tip of the free 5.2  CHEMICAL CHANGE end of the blade on the gas stove. Wait A change with which you are quite for a few minutes. familiar is the rusting of iron.  If you Does the colour of the tip of the blade leave a piece of iron in the open for some change? time, it acquires a film of brownish Remove the blade from the flame. substance.  This substance is called rust Observe the tip once again after some and the process is called rusting time. (Fig. 5.2). Iron gates of parks or Does it get back its original colour? farmlands, iron benches kept in lawns In Activities 5.1 and 5.2 above, you and gardens, almost every article of iron, saw that paper and a piece of chalk kept in the open gets rusted. At home underwent changes in size. In Activities you must have seen shovels and spades getting rusted when exposed to the Fig. 5.2   Rusting iron 48 SCIENCE Reprint 2024-25 atmosphere for some time. In the light (Fig. 5.3). When it is completely kitchen, a wet iron pan (tawa) often gets burnt it leaves behind a powdery ash. rusted if left in that state for some time. Does the ash look like the Rust is not iron.  It is different from iron magnesium ribbon? on which it gets deposited. The change can be represented by Let us consider a few more changes the following equation: where new substances are formed. Magnesium (Mg) + Oxygen (O )  2 Activity 5.6 Magnesium oxide (MgO) (To be demonstrated by the teacher) The equations here are different from CAUTION those in mathematics. In equations It is dangerous to look for long at the of this kind, the arrow implies burning magnesium ribbon.  The ‘becomes’. No attempt should be made teachers should advise children not to balance chemical equations at this to stare at the burning ribbon. stage. Get a small piece of a thin strip or ribbon of magnesium.  Clean its tip with Collect the ash and mix it with a sandpaper.  Bring the tip near a candle small amount of water. Stir the mixture flame.  It burns with a brilliant white (aqueous solution) well. Test the mixture with blue and red litmus papers. Does the mixture turn red litmus blue? Does the mixture turn blue litmus red? On the basis of this test, how do you classify the aqueous solution — acidic or basic? On dissolving the ash in water it forms a new substance. This change can be written in the form of the following equation: Magnesium oxide (MgO) + Water (H O) Magnesium hydroxide [Mg(OH) ] 2 2 As you have already learnt in Chapter 4, magnesium hydroxide is a base. So, magnesium oxide is a new substance formed on burning of magnesium. Fig. 5.3  Magnesium ribbon burning Magnesium hydroxide is another new PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL CHANGES 49 Reprint 2024-25 substance formed by mixing magnesium colour of the solution from blue to oxide with water. green is due to the formation of iron Activity 5.7 sulphate, a new substance. The brown deposit on the iron nail is copper, (To be demonstrated by the teacher) another new substance. We can write Dissolve about a teaspoonful of copper the reaction as: sulphate (blue vitriol or neela thotha) in Copper sulphate solution (blue) + Iron about half a cup of water in a glass  Iron sulphate solution (green) tumbler or a beaker. Add a few drops of + Copper (brown deposit) dilute sulphuric acid to the solution. You should get a blue coloured solution. Activity 5.8 Save a small sample of the solution in a Take about a teaspoonful of vinegar in test tube or a small glass bottle. Drop a a test tube. Add a pinch of baking soda nail or a used shaving blade into the to it. You would hear a hissing sound remaining solution. Wait for half an and see bubbles of a gas coming out. hour or so. Observe the colour of the Pass this gas through freshly prepared solution. Compare it with the colour of lime water as shown in Fig. 5.5. the sample solution saved separately What happens to the lime water? (Fig. 5.4). Iron sulphate (greenish) Copper sulphate (blue) Fig. 5.4   Change in colour of the copper sulphate solution due to reaction with iron Do you see any change in the colour The change in the test tube is as of the solution? follows: Take out the nail or the blade. Vinegar (Acetic acid) + Baking soda Has it changed in any way? (Sodium hydrogencarbonate)  The changes that you notice are Carbon dioxide + other substances due to a reaction between copper The reaction between carbon dioxide sulphate and iron. The change of and lime water is as follows: 50 SCIENCE Reprint 2024-25 A change in which one or more new substances are formed is called a chemical change. A chemical change is also called a chemical reaction. Carbon dioxide Chemical changes are very important in our lives.  All new substances are formed as a result of chemical changes. Vinegar + For example, digestion of food in our Baking soda body, ripening of fruits, fermentation of Lime grapes, etc., happen due to series of water chemical changes. A medicine is the end product of a chain of chemical reactions. Useful new materials, such as plastics Fig. 5.5  Set up to pass gas through lime water and detergents, are produced by chemical reactions. Indeed, every new Carbon dioxide (CO ) + Lime water 2 material is discovered by studying [Ca(OH)2]  Calcium Carbonate chemical changes. (CaCO ) + Water (H O) 3 2 We have seen that one or more new When carbon dioxide is passed substances are produced in a chemical through lime water, calcium carbonate change.  In addition to new products, is formed, which makes lime water milky. the following may accompany a chemical The turning of lime water into milky is a change: standard test of carbon dioxide. You will  Heat, light or any other radiation use it in Chapter 6 to show that the air (ultraviolet, for example) may be given we breathe out is rich in carbon dioxide. off or absorbed. In Activities 5.6–5.8, you saw that  Sound may be produced. in each change one or more new substances were formed. In Activity 5.6,  A change in smell may take place or the ash was the new substance formed a new smell may be given off. when magnesium was burnt in air. In  A colour change may take place . Activity 5.7, the reaction of copper  A gas may be formed. sulphate with iron produced iron Let us look at some examples. sulphate and copper.  Both of these are You saw that burning of magnesium new substances. Copper was deposited ribbon is a chemical change.  Burning on the shaving blade of iron. In Activity of coal, wood or leaves is also a chemical 5.8, vinegar and baking soda together change. In fact, burning of any produced carbon dioxide, which turned substance is a chemical change. lime water milky. Can you name the new Burning is always accompanied by substance formed in this reaction? production of heat. PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL CHANGES 51 Reprint 2024-25 Explosion of a firework is a chemical change. You know that such an explosion produces heat, light, sound We learnt in Chapter 1 that and unpleasant gases that pollute the plants produce their food by atmosphere. That is why you are advised a process called photosynthesis. not to play with fireworks. Can we call photosynthesis When food gets spoiled, it produces a chemical change? a foul smell. Shall we call this change a chemical change? Paheli said that even digestion You must have noticed that a slice of is a chemical change. an apple acquires a brown colour if it is not consumed immediately. If you have not seen this change in colour, cut a fresh slice of apple and keep it away for 5.3 RUSTING OF IRON some time. Repeat the same activity with a slice of potato or brinjal. The change Let us get back to rusting. This is one of colour in these cases is due to the change that affects iron articles and formation of new substances. Are not slowly destroys them. Since iron is used these changes chemical changes? in making bridges, ships, cars, truck In Chapter 4, you neutralised an acid bodies and many other articles, the with a base.  Is neutralisation a chemical monetary loss due to rusting is huge. change? The process of rusting can be represented by the following equation: Iron (Fe) + Oxygen (O , from the air) 2 A protective shield + water (H2O) rust (iron oxide Fe2O3) For rusting, the presence of both You must have heard of the ozone layer oxygen and water (or water vapour) in our atmosphere. It protects us from is essential. the harmful ultraviolet radiation which In fact, if the content of moisture in come from the sun. Ozone absorbs this air is high, which means if it is more radiation and breaks down to oxygen. humid, rusting becomes faster. Oxygen is different from ozone. Can So, how do we prevent rusting? we call the breaking down of ozone a Prevent iron articles from coming in chemical change? contact with oxygen, or water, or both. If ultraviolet radiation were not One simple way is to apply a coat of absorbed by ozone, it would reach the paint or grease. In fact, these coats earth’s surface and cause harm to us should be applied regularly to prevent and other life forms. Ozone acts as a rusting. Another way is to deposit a layer natural shield against this radiation. of a metal like chromium or zinc on iron. 52 SCIENCE Reprint 2024-25 formed from their solutions. The process is called crystallisation.  It is an Oh, that is why my friend example of a physical change. Rita is always complaining about iron articles rusting so Activity 5.9 fast.  She lives near the coast. (To be performed in the presence of the teacher) This process of depositing a layer of zinc on iron is called galvanisation. The iron CAUTION pipes we use in our homes to carry water Use only dilute sulphuric acid. Be are galvanised to prevent rusting. careful while boiling water. You know that ships are made of iron and a part of them remains under water. Take a cupful of water in a beaker On the part above water also, water and add a few drops of dilute sulphuric drops keep clinging to the ship’s outer acid.  Heat the water. When it starts surface. Moreover, the water of the sea boiling add copper sulphate powder contains many salts. The salt water slowly while stirring continuously makes the process of rust formation (Fig. 5.6). Continue adding copper faster. Therefore, ships suffer a lot of sulphate powder till no more powder can damage from rusting in spite of being be dissolved. Filter the solution.  Allow it to cool. Do not disturb the solution Stainless steel is made by mixing iron when it is cooling. Look at the solution with carbon and metals like after some time. Can you see the crystals chromium, nickel and manganese.  It of copper sulphate?  If not, wait for some does not rust. more time. painted. So much so, that a fraction of Copper sulphate ship’s iron has to be replaced every year. Can you imagine the monetary loss to the world? 5.4 CRYSTALLISATION In Class VI you have learnt that salt can be obtained by the evaporation of sea water. The  salt obtained in this manner is not pure and the shape of its crystals Crystals cannot be seen clearly. However, large crystals of pure substances can be Fig. 5.6  Crystals of copper sulphate PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL CHANGES 53 Reprint 2024-25 You have learnt about physical and changes that you observe around you chemical changes. Try to identify as physical or chemical changes. Keywords Chemical change Crystallisation Physical change Chemical reaction Galvanisation Rusting What you have learnt  Changes can be of two types, physical and chemical.  Physical changes are changes in the physical properties of substances. No new substances are formed in these changes.  These changes may be reversible.  In chemical changes new substances are produced.  Some substances can be obtained in pure state from their solutions by crystallisation. Exercises 1. Classify the changes involved in the following processes as physical or chemical changes: (a) Photosynthesis (b) Dissolving sugar in water (c) Burning of coal (d)  Melting of wax (e) Beating aluminium to make aluminium foil (f ) Digestion of food 2. State whether the following statements are true or false.  In case a statement is false, write the corrected statement in your notebook. (a) Cutting a log of wood into pieces is a chemical change.  (True/False) (b) Formation of manure from leaves is a physical change.  (True/False) 54 SCIENCE Reprint 2024-25 (c) Iron pipes coated with zinc do not get rusted easily.  (True/False) (d) Iron and rust are the same substances.  (True/False) (e) Condensation of steam is not a chemical change.  (True/False) 3. Fill in the blanks in the following statements: (a) When carbon dioxide is passed through lime water, it turns milky due to the formation of _________. (b) The chemical name of baking soda is  _________. (c) Two methods by which rusting of iron can be prevented are _________ and  _________. (d) Changes in which only  _________ properties of a substance change are called physical changes. (e) Changes in which new substances are formed are called  _________ changes. 4. When baking soda is mixed with lemon juice, bubbles are formed with the evolution of a gas. What type of change is it?  Explain. 5. When a candle burns, both physical and chemical changes take place. Identify these changes.  Give another example of a familiar process in which both the chemical and physical changes take place. 6. How would you show that setting of curd is a chemical change? 7. Explain why burning of wood and cutting it into small pieces are considered as two different types of changes. 8. Describe how crystals of copper sulphate are prepared. 9. Explain how painting of an iron gate prevents it from rusting. 10. Explain why rusting of iron objects is faster in coastal areas than in deserts. 11. The gas we use in the kitchen is called liquified petroleum gas (LPG). In the cylinder it exist as a liquid. When it comes out from the cylinder it becomes a gas (Change – A) then it burns (Change – B). The following statements pertain to these changes. Choose the correct one. (i) Process – A is a chemical change. (ii) Process – B is a chemical change. (iii) Both processes A and B are chemical changes. (iv) None of these processes is a chemical change. 12. Anaerobic bacteria digest animal waste and produce biogas (Change – A). The biogas is then burnt as fuel (Change – B). The following statements pertain to these changes. Choose the correct one. (i) Process – A is a chemical change. (ii) Process – B is a chemical change. PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL CHANGES 55 Reprint 2024-25 (iii) Both processes A and B are chemical changes. (iv) None of these processes is a chemical change. Extended Learning — Activities and Projects 1. Describe two changes that are harmful.  Explain why you consider them harmful.  How can you prevent them? 2. Take three glass bottles with wide mouths.  Label them A, B and C.  Fill about half of bottle A with ordinary tap water.  Fill bottle B with water which has been boiled for several minutes, to the same level as in A.  In bottle C, take the same boiled water and of the same amount as in other bottles. In each bottle put a few similar iron nails so that they are completely under water.  Add a teaspoonful of cooking oil to the water in bottle C so that it forms a film on its surface. Put the bottles away for a few days. Take out nails from each bottle and observe them. Explain your observations. 3. Prepare crystals of alum. 4. Collect information about the types of fuels used for cooking in your area.  Discuss with your teachers/parents/others which fuels are less polluting and why. Did you know? Near the Qutub Minar in Delhi stands an iron pillar (Fig. 5.7) which is more than 7 metres high. It weighs more than 6000 kg. It was built more than 1600 years ago.  After such a long period it has not rusted. For its quality of rust resistance it has been examined by scientists from all parts of the world. It tells something about the advances India had made in metal technology as back as 1600 years ago. Fig. 5.7   Iron pillar 56 SCIENCE Reprint 2024-25