1 Nutrition in Plants In Class VI you learnt that food is utilisation by the body. The mode of essential for all living organisms. nutrition in which organisms make food You also learnt that carbohydrates, themselves from simple substances is proteins, fats, vitamins and minerals are called autotrophic (auto = self; trophos components of food. These components = nourishment) nutrition. Therefore, of food are called nutrients and are plants are called autotrophs. Animals necessary for our body. and most other organisms take in food All living organisms require food. prepared by plants. They are called Plants can synthesise food for heterotrophs (heteros = other). themselves  but animals including humans cannot. They get it from plants or animals that eat plants. Thus, humans and animals are directly or Paheli wants to know why indirectly dependent on plants. our body cannot make food from carbon dioxide, water and minerals like plants do. Boojho wants to know how plants prepare Now we may ask where the food their own food. factories of plants are located: whether food is made in all parts of a plant or 1.1 MODE OF N only in certain parts? How do plants UTRITION IN PLANTS obtain the raw materials from the Plants are the only organisms that can surroundings? How do they transport prepare food for themselves by using them to the food factories of plants? water, carbon dioxide and minerals. The raw materials are present in their 1.2 PHOTOSYNTHESIS — FOOD surroundings. MAKING PROCESS IN PLANTS The nutrients enable living Leaves are the food factories of plants. organisms to build their bodies, to grow, Therefore, all the raw materials must to repair damaged parts of their bodies reach the leaf. Water and minerals and provide the energy to carry out life present in the soil are absorbed by the processes. Nutrition is the mode of roots and transported to the leaves. taking food by an organism and its Carbon dioxide from air is taken in Reprint 2024-25 Cells You have seen that buildings are made of bricks. Nucleus Similarly, the bodies of living organisms are made of tiny units called cells. Cells can be seen only under the microscope. Some organisms are made of only one cell. The cell is enclosed by Cytoplasm a thin outer boundary, called the cell membrane. Most cells have a distinct, centrally located Cell membrane spherical structure called the nucleus (Fig. 1.1). The nucleus is surrounded by a jelly-like substance called cytoplasm. Fig. 1.1 Cell through the tiny pores present on the The leaves have a green pigment surface of leaves. These pores are called chlorophyll. It helps leaves to surrounded by ‘guard cells’. Such pores capture the energy of the sunlight. This are called stomata [Fig. 1.2 (c)]. energy is used to synthesise (prepare) food from carbon dioxide and water. Since the synthesis of food occurs in the Boojho wants to know how water presence of sunlight, it is called and minerals absorbed by roots photosynthesis (Photo: light; synthesis : reach the leaves. to combine). So we find that chlorophyll, Water and minerals are transported sunlight, carbon dioxide and water are to the leaves by the vessels which run necessary to carry out the process of like pipes throughout the root, the stem, photosynthesis. It is a unique process the branches and the leaves. They form on the earth. The solar energy is a continuous path or passage for the captured by the leaves and stored in the nutrients to reach the leaf. They are plant in the form of food. Thus, sun is called vessels. You will learn more about the ultimate source of energy for all transport of materials in plants in living organisms. Chapter 7. Can you imagine life on earth in the absence of photosynthesis! In the absence of photosynthesis there would not be any food. The Paheli wants to know what is so survival of almost all living organisms special about the leaves that they directly or indirectly depends upon the can synthesise food but  other food made by the plants. Besides, parts of the plant cannot. oxygen which is essential for the survival 2 SCIENCE Reprint 2024-25 Besides leaves, photosynthesis also takes place in other green parts of the plant — in green stems and green branches. The desert plants have scale- or spine-like leaves to reduce loss of water by transpiration. These plants have green stems which carry out photosynthesis. of all organisms is produced during Light energy photosynthesis. In the absence of photosynthesis, life would be impossible on the earth. During photosynthesis, chlorophyll containing cells of leaves (Fig. 1.2), in Carbon dioxide the presence of sunlight, use carbon Chlorophyll dioxide and water to synthesise Oxygen in leaf carbohydrates (Fig. 1.3). The process can be represented in an equation: Water and Carbon dioxide  water sunlight  minerals chlorophyll Carbohydrate  oxygen Fig. 1.3   Diagram showing photosynthesis Chlorophyll During the process oxygen is released. The presence of starch in leaves indicates the occurrence of photosynthesis. Starch is also a carbohydrate. Guard Cells Stoma Boojho has observed some (b) Section of a leaf plants with deep red, violet or brown leaves. He wants to Guard cells know whether these leaves also carry out photosynthesis. (a) Leaf Activity 1.1 Stomatal opening Take two potted plants of the same kind. (c) Stoma Keep one in the dark (or in a black box) Fig. 1.2 for 72 hours and the other in sunlight. NUTRITION IN PLANTS 3 Reprint 2024-25 Perform iodine test with the leaves of carbohydrates are made of carbon, both the plants as you did in Class VI. hydrogen and oxygen. These are used Record your results. Now leave the pot to synthesise other components of food which was earlier kept in the dark, in such as proteins and fats. But proteins the sunlight for 3 – 4 days and perform are nitrogenous substances which the iodine test again on its leaves. contain nitrogen. From where do the Record your observations in your plants obtain nitrogen? notebook. Recall that nitrogen is present in The leaves other than green also have abundance in gaseous form in the air. chlorophyll. The large amount of red, However, plants cannot absorb nitrogen brown and other pigments mask the in this form. Soil has certain bacteria that green colour (Fig. 1.4). Photosynthesis convert gaseous nitrogen into a usable takes place in these leaves also. form and release it into the soil. These are absorbed by the plants along with water. Also, you might have seen farmers adding fertilisers rich in nitrogen to the soil. In this way the plants fulfil their requirements of nitrogen along with the other constituents. Plants can then synthesise proteins and vitamins. 1.3 OTHER MODES OF NUTRITION IN PLANTS Fig. 1.4  Leaves of various colours There are some plants which do not have chlorophyll. They cannot synthesise You often see slimy, green patches food. How do they survive and from in ponds or stagnant water bodies. These where do they derive nutrition? Like are generally formed by the growth of humans and animals such plants organisms called algae. Can you guess depend on the food produced by other why algae are green in colour? They plants. They use the heterotrophic contain chlorophyll which gives them mode of nutrition. Look at Fig. 1.5. Do the green colour. Algae can also prepare you see a yellow wiry branched structure their own food by photosynthesis. twining around the stem and branches Synthesis of plant food other of a tree? This is a plant called Cuscuta (Amarbel). It does not have chlorophyll. than carbohydrates It takes readymade food from the plant You have just learnt that plants on which it is climbing. The plant on synthesise carbohydrates through the which it climbs is called the host. Since process of photosynthesis. The it deprives the host of valuable nutrients, 4 SCIENCE Reprint 2024-25 hair which are directed downwards. When an insect lands in the pitcher, the lid closes and the trapped insect gets entangled into the hair. The lid closes and the insect is trapped. The insect is digested by the digestive juices secreted in the pitcher and its nutrients are absorbed. Such insect-eating plants are called insectivorous plants. Is it possible that such plants do not get all the required nutrients from the soil in which they grow? Fig. 1.5  Cuscuta (Amarbel) on host plant Cuscuta is called the parasite. Are we Boojho is confused. If the and other animals also a kind of pitcher plant is green and parasites? You should think about it carries out photosynthesis, then and discuss with your teacher. why does it feed on insects? Lid Paheli wants to know whether mosquitoes, bed bugs, lice and leeches that suck our blood are also parasites. Have you seen or heard of plants that can eat animals? There are a few plants which can trap insects and digest them. Is it not amazing? Such plants may be Leaf modified green or of some other colour. Look at into pitcher the plant in Fig. 1.6. The pitcher-like or Fig. 1.6  Pitcher plant showing lid and pitcher jug-like structure is the modified part of leaf. The apex of the leaf forms a lid 1.4 SAPROTROPHS which can open and close the mouth of You might have seen packets of the pitcher. Inside the pitcher there are mushrooms sold in the vegetable NUTRITION IN PLANTS 5 Reprint 2024-25 market. You may have also seen fluffy umbrella-like patches growing in moist soils or on rotting wood during the rainy season (Fig. 1.7). Let us find out what type of nutrients they need to survive and from where they get them. Fig. 1.8  Fungi growing on bread These organisms are called fungi. They have a different mode of nutrition. They absorb the nutrients from the Fig. 1.7  Packet of mushrooms, a mushroom bread. This mode of nutrition in which growing on decayed material organisms take in nutrients from dead and decaying matter is called saprotrophic nutrition. Such organisms with saprotrophic mode of nutrition are Boojho wants to know how called saprotrophs. these organisms acquire Fungi also grow on pickles, leather, nutrients. They do not have clothes and other articles that are left mouths like animals do. They are in hot and humid weather for long time. not like green plants as they lack During the rainy season they spoil many chlorophyll and cannot make food things. Ask your parents about the by photosynthesis. menace of fungi in your house. The fungal spores are generally present  in the air. When they land on Activity 1.2 Take a piece of bread and moisten it with water. Leave it in a moist warm place Paheli is keen to know for 2–3 days or until fluffy patches whether her beautiful shoes, appear on them (Fig. 1.8). What is the which she wore on special colour of these patches? Observe the occasions, were spoiled by fungi patches under a microscope or a during the rainy season. She magnifying glass. Write down your wants to know how fungi appear observations in the notebook. You will suddenly during the rainy see cotton-like threads spread on the season. piece of bread. 6 SCIENCE Reprint 2024-25 1.5 HOW NUTRIENTS ARE REPLENISHED IN THE SOIL Have you seen farmers spreading Boojho says once his manure or fertilisers in the fields, or grandfather told him that his gardeners using them in lawns or in wheat fields were spoiled by a pots? Do you know why this is done? fungus. He wants to know if You learnt that plants absorb fungi cause diseases also. minerals and nutrients from the soil. Paheli told him that many fungi So, their amounts in the soil keep on like yeast and mushrooms are declining. Fertilisers and manures useful, but some fungi contain nutrients such as nitrogen, cause diseases in plants, potassium, phosphorous, etc. These animals including nutrients need to be added from time humans. Some to time to enrich the soil. We can grow fungi are also plants and keep them healthy if used as medicines. we can fulfil the nutrient requirement of plants. Usually crop plants absorb a lot of wet and warm things they germinate and nitrogen and the soil becomes deficient grow. Now, can you figure out how we in nitrogen. You learnt that though can protect our things from getting nitrogen gas is available in plenty in the spoiled? air, plants cannot use it in the manner Some organisms live together and they can use carbon dioxide. They need share both shelter and nutrients. This nitrogen in a soluble form. The relationship is called symbiosis. For bacterium called Rhizobium can take example, certain fungi live inside the atmospheric nitrogen and convert it into roots of plants. The plants provide a usable form. But Rhizobium cannot nutrients to the fungus and, in return, make its own food. So it often lives in the fungus provides water and certain the roots of gram, peas, moong, beans nutrients. and other legumes and provides them In organisms called lichens, a with nitrogen. In return, the plants chlorophyll-containing partner, which is provide food and shelter to the an alga, and a fungus live together. The bacteria. They, thus, have a fungus provides shelter, water and symbiotic relationship. This association minerals to the alga and, in return, the is of great significance for the alga prepares and provides food to the farmers. They can reduce the use of fungus. nitrogenous fertiliser where leguminous NUTRITION IN PLANTS 7 Reprint 2024-25 plants are grown. Most of the pulses (dals) from other organisms. All animals  are are obtained from leguminous plants. categorised as heterotrophs since In this chapter you learnt that they depend on plants and other most of the plants are autotrophs. animals for food. Can we say that Only a few plants are parasitic or the insectivorous plants are partial saprotrophic. They derive nutrition heterotrophs? Keywords Autotrophic Insectivorous Photosynthesis Chlorophyll Nutrient Saprotrophs Heterotrophs Nutrition Saprotrophic Host Parasite Stomata What you have learnt  All organisms need food and utilise it to get energy for growth and maintenance of their body.  Green plants synthesise food for themselves by the process of photosynthesis. They are autotrophs.  Plants like Cuscuta are parasites. They take food from the host plant.  Plants use simple chemical substances like carbon dioxide, water and minerals for the synthesis of food.  Chlorophyll, water, carbon dioxide and sunlight are the essential requirements for photosynthesis.  Complex chemical substances such as carbohydrates are the products of photosynthesis.  Solar energy is absorbed by the chlorophylls present in leaves/plants.  Oxygen is produced during photosynthesis.  Oxygen released in photosynthesis is utilised by living organisms for their survival.  Many fungi derive nutrition from dead and decaying matter. They are saprotrophs.  A few plants and all animals are dependent on others for their nutrition and are called heterotrophs. 8 SCIENCE Reprint 2024-25 Exercise 1. Why do organisms take food? 2. Distinguish between a parasite and a saprotroph. 3. How would you test the presence of starch in leaves? 4. Give a brief description of the process of synthesis of food in green plants. 5. Show with the help of a sketch that plants are the ultimate source of food. 6. Fill in the blanks: (a) Green plants are called _________________ since they synthesise their own food. (b) The food synthesised by plants is stored as _________________. (c) In photosynthesis solar energy is absorbed by the pigment called ___________. (d) During photosynthesis plants take in ______________________ and release __________________ gas. 7. Name the following: (i) A parasitic plant with yellow, slender and branched stem. (ii) A plant that is partially autotrophic. (iii) The pores through which leaves exchange gases. 8. Tick the correct answer: (a) Cuscuta is an example of: (i) autotroph (ii) parasite (iii) saprotroph (iv) host (b) The plant which traps and feeds on insects is: (i) Cuscuta (ii) china rose (iv) pitcher plant (iv) rose 9. Match the items given in Column I with those in Column II: Column I Column II Chlorophyll Rhizobium Nitrogen Heterotrophs Cuscuta Pitcher plant Animals Leaf Insects Parasite 10. Mark ‘T’ if the statement is true and ‘F’ if it is false: (i) Carbon dioxide is released during photosynthesis. (T/F) (ii) Plants which synthesise their food are called saprotrophs. (T/F) NUTRITION IN PLANTS 9 Reprint 2024-25 (iii) The product of photosynthesis is not a protein. (T/F) (iv) Solar energy is converted into chemical energy during photosynthesis. (T/F) 11. Choose the correct option from the following: Which part of the plant takes in carbon dioxide from the air for photosynthesis? (i) Root hair (ii) Stomata (iii) Leaf veins (iv) Petals 12. Choose the correct option from the following: Plants take carbon dioxide from the atmosphere mainly through their: (i) roots (ii) stem (iii) flowers (iv) leaves 13. Why do farmers grow many fruits and vegetable crops inside large green houses? What are the advantages to the farmers? Extended Learning — Activities and Projects 1. Project Take a potted plant with broad leaves. Take two strips of black paper and cut out a small square in the centres. Cover a part of two leaves with these papers and secure them with paper clips (Fig. 1.9). Keep the plant in sunlight for 2–5 days. Observe the difference in the colour of the covered and the uncovered portions on the leaf. Perform iodine test on this leaf. Did Fig. 1.9  Experiment to test the the two parts show different occurrence of photosynthesis results? Now take second leaf. Remove the strip and expose the covered part to the sunlight for 2–3 days and do the iodine test again. Describe your observations. 2. Visit a green house if there is one near your place. Observe how they grow plants. Find out how they regulate the amount of light, water and carbon dioxide to grow the plants. 3. Try growing a sweet potato just in water. Describe your experiment and observations. You can read more on the following website: www.phschool.com/science/biology_place/biocoach/photosynth/ overview.htm Did you know? Light is so important to plants that their leaves grow in many patterns so as to absorb maximum sunlight. 10 SCIENCE Reprint 2024-25