REACHING THE AGE OF ADOLESCENCE n the previous chapter, you have no longer a child but are on the way to Ilearnt how animals reproduce. It is becoming an adult. only after ‘growing up’ to a certain age that human beings and many other animals can reproduce. Why can I wonder how long this humans reproduce only after a certain period marked by changes age? in the body will last! In this chapter, you will learn about changes that take place in the human body after which a person becomes capable of reproduction. It is a strange period of life In Chapter 6, you have learnt about when you are neither a child nor human reproductive organs. Here, we an adult. I wonder whether this shall discuss the role that hormones play period between childhood and in bringing about changes that make a adulthood had a special name! child grow into an adult. Growing up is a natural process. The 7.1 Adolescence and Puberty period of life, when the body undergoes changes, leading to reproductive Boojho was celebrating his 12th maturity, is called adolescence. birthday. After his friends left, Boojho Adolescence begins around the age of and Paheli began chatting with their 11 and lasts upto 18 or 19 years of age. parents. Paheli studies in an all-girls Since this period covers the ‘teens’ (13 school. She started laughing. She to 18 or 19 years of age), adolescents remarked that many of Boojho’s  school are also called ‘teenagers’. In girls, friends, whom she met after a year, had adolescence may begin a year or two suddenly shot up in height. Some of earlier than in boys. Also, the period of them were looking very funny with a adolescence varies from person to person. hairy line above their lips. Her mother The human body undergoes several explained that the boys had grown up. changes during adolescence. These Growth begins from the day one is changes mark the onset of puberty. The born. But upon crossing the age of 10 most important change which marks or 11, there is a sudden spurt in growth puberty is that boys and girls become which becomes noticeable. The changes capable of reproduction. Puberty ends taking place in the body are part of when an adolescent reaches reproductive growing up. They indicate that you are maturity. 2024-25 the tallest and who might be the shortest in your class. Paheli and Boojho realised that sudden Age in increase in height and % of full height hairy line above the lips Years Boys Girls in boys were signs of adolescence. They 8 72% 77% wanted to know more about other changes at 9 75% 81% puberty. 10 78% 84% 11 81% 88% 12 84% 91% 7.2 Changes at Puberty 13 88% 95% Increase in Height The most conspicuous change during 14 92% 98% puberty is the sudden increase in 15 95% 99% height. At this time the long bones, that is, the bones of the arms and the legs 16 98% 99.5% elongate and make a person tall. 17 99% 100% Activity 7.1 18 100% 100% The following chart gives the average rate of growth in height of boys and girls with age. The figures in columns 2 and 3, give the Calculation for full height (cm) percentage of the height a person Present height (cm) has reached at the age given in × 100 % of full height at this age column 1. For example, by the age     (as given in the chart) 11, a boy has reached 81% of his probable full height, while a girl Example: has reached 88% of her full height. These figures are only A boy is 9 years old and 120 cm representative and there may be tall. At the end of the growth period individual variations. he is likely to be Use the Table for your friends and work out how tall they are likely 120 ×100  cm = 160 cm tall to be. Find out who is likely to be 75 80 SCIENCE 2024-25 Activity 7.2 There is no need for Paheli to worry. All parts of the body do not grow at the Use the data given in Activity 7.1 to same rate. Sometimes the arms and legs draw a graph. Take age on the or hands and feet of adolescents look X-axis and per cent growth in height oversized and out of proportion with the on the Y-axis. Highlight the point body. But soon the other parts catch representing your age on the graph. up and result in a proportionate body. Find out the percentage of height You must have noticed that height you have already reached. Calculate the height you might eventually of an individual is more or less similar reach. Tally your graph with the one to that of some family member. This is given here (Fig. 7.1). because height depends on the genes inherited from parents. It is, however, very important to eat the right kind of food during these growing years. This helps the bones, muscles and other parts of the body get adequate nourishment for growth. You will find nutritional needs of adolescents discussed later in the lesson. Change in Body Shape Have you noticed that boys in your class have broader shoulders and wider chests than boys in  junior classes? This is Fig. 7.1 : Graph showing percentage of height because they have entered the age of with age puberty when shoulders generally broaden as a result of growth. In girls, Initially, girls grow faster than boys the region below the waist becomes but by about 18 years of age, both reach wider. their maximum height. The rate of In boys, the muscles of the body grow growth in height varies in different more prominently than in the girls. individuals. Some may grow suddenly Thus, changes occurring in adolescent at puberty and then slow down, while boys and girls are different. others may grow gradually. Voice Change Did you notice that sometimes the voice of some of the boys in your class cracks? I am worried. Though I At puberty, the voice box or the larynx have become taller, my begins to grow. Boys develop larger voice face looks much smaller compared to my body. boxes. The growing voice box in boys can be seen as a protruding part of the throat REACHING THE AGE OF ADOLESCENCE 81 2024-25 called Adam’s apple (Fig. 7.2). In girls, and pimples on the face at this time the larynx is hardly visible from the because of the increased activity of these outside because of its small size. glands in the skin. Generally, girls have a high pitched voice, whereas boys have a deep voice. In Development of Sex Organs adolescent boys, sometimes, the muscles Look up Fig. 6.1 and 6.3 of the of the growing voice box go out of control previous lesson which show sex and the voice becomes hoarse. This state organs of humans. At puberty, male may remain for a few days or weeks after sex organs like the testes and penis which the voice becomes normal. develop completely. The testes also begin to produce sperms. In girls, the ovaries enlarge and eggs begin to Adam’s mature. Also ovaries start releasing apple mature eggs. Reaching Mental, Intellectual and Emotional Maturity Adolescence is also a period of change in a person’s way of thinking. Adolescents are more independent than before and are also self conscious. Intellectual development takes place and they tend to spend considerable time Fig. 7.2 : Adam’s apple in a grown up boy thinking. In fact, it is often the time in one’s life when the brain has the greatest capacity for learning. Many of my classmates Sometimes, however, an adolescent may have a hoarse voice. Now I feel insecure while trying to adjust to know why? the changes in the body and mind. But as adolescent learners, you should know Increased Activity of Sweat and that there is no reason to feel insecure. Sebaceous Glands These changes are a natural part of During puberty the secretion of sweat growing up. glands and sebaceous glands (oil glands) increases. Many young people get acne 7.3 Secondary Sexual Characters A few glands such as sweat glands, oil glands and salivary glands release You have learnt in Chapter 6, that their secretions through ducts. testes and ovaries are the reproductive Endocrine glands release hormones organs. They produce the gametes, directly into the bloodstream. So, they that is, sperms and ova. In girls, are also termed ductless glands. breasts begin to develop at puberty 82 SCIENCE 2024-25 and boys begin to grow facial hair, that The testes and ovaries secrete sex is, moustaches and beard. As these hormones. You have just learnt that features help to distinguish the male these hormones are responsible for the from the female they are called male and female secondary sexual secondary sexual characters. Boys characters. Further, the sex hormones also develop hair on their chest. In are under the control of hormones from both, boys and girls, hair grows under the pituitary gland (Fig. 7.3). The the arms and in the region above the pituitary secretes many hormones, one thighs or the pubic region. of which makes ova mature in the ovaries and sperms form in the testes. Both Boojho and Paheli wish to know what initiates changes at puberty. The changes which occur at adolescence are controlled by hormones. Hormones are chemical substances. These are secretions from endocrine glands, or endocrine system. The male hormone or testosterone begins to be released by the testes at the onset of puberty. This causes changes in boys about which you have just learnt, for example, the growth of facial hair. Once puberty is reached in girls, ovaries begin to produce the female hormone or estrogen which makes the breasts develop. Milk secreting glands or mammary glands develop inside the breasts. The production of these hormones is under the control of another hormone secreted from an endocrine gland called pituitary gland. Fig. 7.3 : The onset of puberty is controlled by 7.4 Role of Hormones in hormones Initiating Reproductive Function Paheli and Boojho have now Endocrine glands release hormones understood that puberty marks the into the bloodstream to reach a beginning of the reproductive period particular body part called target site. when one becomes capable of The target site responds to the reproduction. But they want to know hormone. There are many endocrine if reproductive life, once begun, glands or ductless glands in the body. continues, or it ends some time. REACHING THE AGE OF ADOLESCENCE 83 2024-25 7.5 Reproductive Phase of Menstrual cycle is controlled by Life in Humans hormones. The cycle includes the maturation of the egg, its release, Adolescents become capable of thickening of uterine wall and its reproduction when their testes and breakdown if pregnancy does not ovaries begin to produce gametes. The occur. In case the egg is fertilised it capacity for maturation  and production begins to divide and then gets of gametes lasts for a much longer time embedded in the uterus for further in males than in females. development as you have learnt in In females, the reproductive phase of Chapter 6 (Fig. 6.8). life begins at puberty (10 to 12 years of age) and generally lasts till the age of 7.6 How is the Sex of the approximately 45 to 50 years. The ova Baby Determined? begin to mature with the onset of puberty. One ovum matures and is released by one of the ovaries once in about 28 to 30 days. During this period, the wall of the uterus becomes I heard my mother and my thick so as to receive the egg, in case aunt talking about my cousin it is fertilised and begins to develop. who is going to have a baby. They were discussing whether This results in pregnancy. If she would give birth to a boy ferti l isation does not occur, the or a girl. I wonder what makes released egg, and the thickened lining the fertilised egg develop of the uterus along with its blood either into a boy or a girl! vessels are shed off. This causes bleeding in women which is called Boy or Girl? menstruation. Menstruation occurs once in about 28 to 30 days. The first Inside the fertilised egg or zygote is the menstrual flow begins at puberty  and instruction for determining the sex of is termed menarche. At 45 to 50 years the baby. This instruction is present in of age, the menstrual cycle stops. the thread-like structures, called Stoppage of menstruation is termed chromosomes in the fertilised egg. menopause. Initially, menstrual cycle Chromosomes are present inside the may be irregular. It take some time to nucleus of every cell. All human beings become regular. have 23 pairs of chromosomes in the nuclei of their cells. Two chromosomes out of these are the sex chromosomes, named X and Y. A female has two X Paheli says that the chromosomes, while a male has one X reproductive life of a and one Y chromosome. The gametes woman lasts from (egg and sperm) have only one set of menarche to menopause. chromosomes. The unfertilised egg Is she right? always has one X chromosome. But 84 SCIENCE 2024-25 sperms are of two kinds. One kind has and ovaries to produce their hormones. an X chromosome, and the other kind You have already learnt that the has a Y chromosome. pituitary gland is an endocrine gland. See Fig. 7.4. When a sperm It is attached to the brain. containing X chromosome fertilises the Apart from the pituitary, the testes egg, the zygote would have two X and the ovaries, there are other chromosomes and develop into a female endocrine glands in the body such as child. If the sperm contributes a Y thyroid, pancreas and adrenals chromosome to the egg (ovum) at (Fig. 7.5). fertilisation, the zygote would develop into a male child. sperms pituitary gland thyroid gland adrenal gland eggs pancreas position of the ovary in the female boy girl testis Fig. 7.4 : Sex determination in humans Now you know that the sex chromosomes of the father determine the Fig. 7.5 : Position of endocrine glands in the sex of an unborn baby. The belief that human body the mother is responsible for the sex of Boojho and Paheli had once visited her baby is completely wrong and to their aunt who was a doctor and blame her for this is totally unjustified. remembered that a boy named Kaka had 7.7 Hormones other than a very big and bulging throat. Their aunt had told them that Kaka was suffering Sex Hormones from ‘goitre’, a disease of the thyroid Look at Fig. 7.3 again. The hormones gland. Kaka’s thyroid gland was not secreted by the pituitary stimulate testes producing the hormone thyroxine. REACHING THE AGE OF ADOLESCENCE 85 2024-25 Their aunt also told them that their controlled by insect hormones. In a uncle was suffering from ‘diabetes’ frog, it is controlled by thyroxine, the because his pancreas was not producing hormone produced by thyroid. the hormone insulin in sufficient Thyroxine production requires the quantities. Boojho and Paheli then presence of iodine in water. If the water asked their aunt about the adrenal in which the tadpoles are growing does glands, which are also shown in the not contain sufficient iodine, the chart hung on the wall of her clinic. The tadpoles cannot become adults. aunt told them that adrenal glands secrete hormones which maintain the correct salt balance in the blood. If people do not have Adrenals also produce the hormone enough iodine in their diet, adrenalin. It helps the body to adjust will they get goitre caused to stress when one is very angry, by lack of thyroxine? embarrassed or worried. Thyroid and adrenals secrete their hormones when they receive orders from Activity 7.3 the pituitary through its hormones. Pituitary also secretes growth hormone which is necessary for the normal Collect information from magazines growth of a person. or from doctors and prepare a note on the importance of consuming iodised salt. You can also look for this information on the internet. Are there hormones in 7.9 Reproductive Health other animals also? Have they any role to play in The physical and mental well being of reproduction? an individual is regarded as an individual’s health. To keep the body healthy, every human being, at any age, 7.8 Role of Hormones in needs to have a balanced diet. The person must also observe personal Completing the Life hygiene and undertake adequate History of Insects and physical exercise. Frogs During adolescence, however, these You have already learnt about the life become even more essential as the body cycle of the frog. The tadpole passes is growing. through certain stages to become a frog Nutritional Needs of the Adolescents (Chapter 6). This change from larva to adult is called metamorphosis Adolescence is a stage of rapid growth (Fig. 6.10). Metamorphosis in insects is and development. Hence the diet for an 86 SCIENCE 2024-25 adolescent has to be carefully planned. Activity 7.5 You have already learnt what a balanced Get ideas from the pictures given in diet is. Recall that a balanced diet means Fig.7.6. Prepare charts or posters that the meals include proteins, and paste them in the class so that carbohydrates, fats and vitamins in you are aware of the diet for requisite proportions. Our Indian meal adolescents. You may use your of roti/rice, dal (pulses) and vegetables creative ideas and present it like an is a balanced meal. Milk is a balanced advertisement. You may even food in itself. Fruits also provide organise a competition on this topic. nourishment. For infants, mother’s milk provides all the nourishment that they need. Iron builds blood and iron-rich food such as leafy vegetables, jaggery, meat, meat citrus, Indian gooseberry (amla) are good vegetables for adolescents. milk and Check items for lunch and dinner in eggs your meal. Is the meal balanced and nutritious? Does it include cereals which give energy and milk, meat, nuts and pulses which provide proteins for growth? Also, does it include fats and fruits sugar that give energy? What about fruits and vegetables which are protective foods? Chips and packed or tinned snacks, though very tasty should never replace regular meals as they do not have adequate nutritional value. grains Activity 7.4 Fig. 7.6 : Nutritious items of food Make a group with your friends. Write down the items of food in your Personal Hygiene breakfast, lunch and dinner you Everyone should have a bath at least had on the previous day. Identify once everyday. It is more necessary for the items responsible for proper teenagers because the increased activity growth. Also identified the  junk of sweat glands sometimes makes the food that you consumed the body smelly. All parts of the body should previous day. be washed and cleaned everyday. If REACHING THE AGE OF ADOLESCENCE 87 2024-25 cleanliness is not maintained there are Activity 7.6 chances of catching bacterial infection. Girls  should take special care of Collect data on the number of cleanliness during the time of menstrual children in your class who exercise flow. They should keep track of their regularly and who do not exercise menstrual cycle and be prepared for the regularly. Did you notice any onset of menstruation. Use sanitary difference in their fitness and napkin or clean homemade pads. health? Prepare a report on the Change pads after every 4–5 hours as benefits of regular exercise. per the requirement. Say “NO” to Drugs Physical exercise Walking and playing in fresh air keeps Adolescence is a period of much the body fit and healthy. All young boys activity in the body and mind which and girls should take walks, exercise is a normal part of growing up. So do and play outdoor games. not feel confused or insecure. If anybody suggests that you will get Myths, Taboos, Do’s and Don’ts relief if you take some drugs, just say You have learnt here and from Chapter 6 the scientific facts related to human ‘No’ unless prescribed by the doctor. reproduction. There are many wrong Drugs are addictive. If you take them notions which you should now be able once, you feel like taking them again to discard as informed adolescents. For and again. They harm the body in the example, there are myths and taboos long run. They ruin health and regarding bodily changes that happiness. adolescents experience. Some of these are given below and you can now argue You must have heard about AIDS why these are myths and not facts. which is caused by a dangerous virus, 1. A girl becomes pregnant if HIV. This virus can pass on to a she looks at boys during normal person from an infected menstruation. person by sharing the syringes used 2. The mother is responsible for the for injecting drugs. It can also be sex of her child. 3. A girl should not be allowed to transmitted to an infant from the work in the kitchen during infected mother through her milk. The menstruation. virus can also be transmitted through You may come across many other myths sexual contact with a person infected and taboos. Discard them. with HIV. Adolescent Pregnancy You might be knowing that in our country, the legal age for marriage is 18 years for girls and 21 years for boys. This is because teenage mothers are not prepared mentally or physically for motherhood. Early marriage and motherhood cause health problems in the mother and the child. It also curtails employment opportunities for the young woman and may cause mental agony as she is not ready for responsibilities of motherhood. 88 SCIENCE 2024-25 KEYWORDS  WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNT ADAM’S APPLE Ü Humans become capable of reproduction after puberty sets in. Children between the ADOLESCENCE ages of 11 and 19 years  are called adolescents. ADRENALIN Ü The onset of puberty brings about growth of the reproductive organs. Hair grow at BALANCED DIET various places on the body. Breasts develop ENDOCRINE GLANDS in girls and facial hair (moustache and beard) appear in boys. Voice of boys becomes hoarse ESTROGEN as voice box enlarges during adolescence. HORMONES Ü Children gain height during adolescence. Ü The onset of puberty and maturity of INSULIN reproductive parts are controlled by hormones. LARYNX Ü Hormones are secretions of endocrine glands which pour them directly into the blood stream. PITUITARY GLAND Ü Pituitary gland secretes hormones which PUBERTY include growth hormone and hormones that make other glands such as the testes, ovaries, REPRODUCTIVE thyroids and adrenals, secrete hormones. HEALTH Pancreas secretes insulin, thyroid produces SECONDARY SEXUAL thyroxine and adrenals produce adrenalin. CHARACTERS Ü Testosterone is the male hormone and estrogen, the female hormone. The uterine wall SEX CHROMOSOMES in females prepares itself to receive the developing fertilised egg. In case there is no TARGET SITE fertilisation, the thickened lining of the uterine TESTOSTERONE wall breaks down and goes out of the body along with blood. This is called menstruation. THYROXINE Ü Sex of the unborn child depends on whether VOICE BOX the zygote has XX or XY chromosomes. Ü It is important to eat balanced food and maintain personal hygiene during adolescence. REACHING THE AGE OF ADOLESCENCE 89 2024-25 Exercises 1. What is the term used for chemical secretions of endocrine glands responsible for changes taking place in the body? 2. Define adolescence. 3. What is menstruation? Explain. 4. List changes in the body that take place at puberty. 5. Prepare a Table having two columns depicting names of endocrine glands and hormones secreted by them. 6. What are sex hormones? Why are they named so? State their function. 7. Choose the correct option. (a) Adolescents should be careful about what they eat, because (i) proper diet develops their brains. (ii) proper diet is needed for the rapid growth taking place in their body. (iii) adolescents feel hungry all the time. (iv) taste buds are well developed in teenagers. (b) Reproductive age in women starts when their (i) menstruation starts. (ii) breasts start developing. (iii) body weight increases. (iv) height increases. (c) The right meal for adolescents consists of (i) chips, noodles, coke. (ii) chapati, dal, vegetables. (iii) rice, noodles and burger. (iv) vegetable cutlets, chips and lemon drink. 8. Write notes on— (a) Adam’s apple. (b) Secondary sexual characters. (c) Sex determination in the unborn baby. 90 SCIENCE 2024-25 9. Word game : Use the clues to work out the words. Across 3. Protruding voice box in boys 4. Glands without ducts 7. Endocrine gland attached to brain 8. Secretion of endocrine glands 9. Pancreatic hormone 10. Female hormone Down 1. Male hormone 2. Secretes thyroxine 3. Another term for teenage 5. Hormone reaches here through blood stream 6. Voice box 7. Term for changes at adolescence REACHING THE AGE OF ADOLESCENCE 91 2024-25 E X E R C I S E S 10. The table below shows the data on likely heights of boys and girls as they grow in age. Draw graphs showing height and age for both boys and girls on the same graph paper. What conclusions can be drawn from these graphs? Age Height (cm) (Years) Boys Girls 0 53 53 4 96 92 8 114 110 12 129 133 16 150 150 20 173 165 Extended Learning — Activities and Projects 1. Find out from your elder relatives about their awareness of the legal status of early marriage. You yourself may get information on it from your teacher, parents, a doctor or the internet. Write a twominute speech explaining why early marriage is not good for the couple. 2. Collect newspaper cuttings and information in magazines about HIV/ AIDS. Write a one page article of 15 to 20 sentences on HIV/AIDS. 3. In our country, according to 2011 census, there are 940 adolescent females for every 1000 males. Find out. (a) the concerns of the community regarding this low ratio. Remember that the chance of having a boy or a girl is equal. (b) what amniocentesis is and how useful this technique is. Why is its use for identification of sex of the unborn child banned in India? 4. Put your ideas together and write a short note on the importance of knowing facts about reproduction. For more information visit : l www.teenshealth.org/teen/sexual_health/ l www.adolescenthealth.com 92 SCIENCE 2024-25