FRICTION ou might have seen a driver of a 9.1 Force of Friction Ycar or a truck slowing down the vehicle at a traffic signal. You, too, Activity 9.1 slow down your bicycle whenever Gently push a book on a table needed by applying brakes. Have you [Fig. 9.2(a)]. You observe that it stops ever thought why a vehicle slows after moving for some distance. down when brakes are applied? Not Repeat this activity pushing the only vehicles, any object, moving over book from the opposite direction the surface of another object slows [Fig. 9.2, (b)]. Does the book stop down when no external force is this time, too? Can you think of an applied on it. Finally it stops. Have explanation? Can we say that a force you not seen a moving ball on the must be acting on the book ground stopping after some time? opposing its motion? This force is Why do we slip when we step on a called the force of friction. banana peel (Fig. 9.1)? Why is it difficult to walk on a smooth and wet floor? (a) (b) Fig. 9.1 : A boy falls down when he steps on a Fig. 9.2 (a), (b) : Friction opposes relative banana peel motion between the You will find the answers to such surfaces of the book and the table questions in this chapter. 2024-25 You saw that if you apply the force for this difference? Repeat this along the left, friction acts along the activity by wrapping a piece of jute right. If you apply the force along the bag around the brick. What do you right, the friction acts along the left observe? direction. In both cases the force opposes the motion of the book. The force of Spring Balance friction always opposes the applied force. In the above activity, the force of Spring balance is a device used for friction acts between the surface of the measuring the force acting on an book and the surface of the table. object. It consists of a coiled spring Is the  friction the same for all the which gets stretched when a force is applied to it. Stretching of the spring surfaces? Does it depend on the is measured by a pointer moving on smoothness of the surfaces? Let us find a graduated scale. The reading on the out. scale gives the magnitude of the force. 9.2 Factors affecting Friction Activity 9.2 Tie a string around a brick. Pull the brick by a spring balance (Fig. 9.3). You need to apply some force. Note down the reading on the spring balance when the brick just begins to move. It gives you a measure of the force of friction between the surface of the brick and the floor. Activity 9.3 Make an inclined plane on a smooth Fig. 9.3 : A brick is being pulled by spring floor, or on a table. You may use a balance wooden board supported by bricks, Now wrap a piece of polythene or books. [Fig. 9.4 (a)]. Put a mark with a pen at any point A on the around the brick and repeat the inclined plane. Now let  a pencil cell activity. Do you observe any move down from this point. How far difference in the readings of the does it move on the table before spring balance in the above two coming to rest? Note down the cases? What might be the reason distance. Now spread a piece of cloth FRICTION 113 2024-25 Does the distance covered depend on over the table. Make sure that there the nature of the surface on which the are no wrinkles in the cloth. Try the cell moves? activity again [Fig. 9.4 (b)]. Could the smoothness of the surface of the cell also affect the distance travelled by it? Mark A I shall try the activity by wrapping a piece of sandpaper around the cell. Friction is caused by the irregularities on the two surfaces in (a) contact. Even those surfaces which appear very smooth have a large number of minute irregularities on them (Fig. 9.5). Irregularities on the two surfaces lock into one another. When Mark A we attempt to move any surface, we have to apply a force to overcome interlocking. On rough surfaces, there are a larger number of irregularities. So the force of friction is greater if a rough surface is involved. (b) Fig. 9.4 : The pencil cell covers different distances on different surfaces Repeat this activity by spreading a thin layer of sand over the table. Maintain the same slope throughout the activity. Surface of book In which case is the distance covered the minimum? Why is the distance Surface of table covered by the pencil cell different every time. Try to reason why? Discuss the Fig. 9.5 : Surface irregularities result. 114 SCIENCE 2024-25 We see that the friction is caused by friction and you find it somewhat easier the interlocking of irregularities in the to move the box already in motion than two surfaces. It is obvious that the force to get it started. of friction will increase if the two surfaces are pressed harder. You can 9.3 Friction : A Necessary experience it by dragging a mat when Evil nobody is sitting on it, and when a Recall now some of your experiences. Is preson is sitting on it. it easier to hold a kulhar (earthen pot) or a glass tumbler? Suppose the outer surface of the tumbler is greasy, or has a thin layer of cooking oil on it; would it become easier or more difficult to hold it? Just think : would it be possible to hold the glass at all if there is no friction? Recall also how difficult it is to move on a wet muddy track, or wet marble floor. Can you imagine being able to walk at all if there were no friction? You could not write with pen or pencil if there were no friction.  When Fig. 9.6 : You have to push on the box to keep it your teacher is writing with chalk on moving the blackboard, its rough surface rubs Recall your experience when last time off some chalk particles which stick to you moved a heavy box from one place to another (Fig. 9.6). If you have no such experience, get that experience now. What is easier — to move the box from rest, or to move it when it is already in motion? The force required to overcome friction at the instant an object starts moving from rest is a measure of static friction. On the other hand, the force required to keep the object moving with the same speed is a measure of sliding friction. When the box starts sliding, the contact points on its surface, do not get enough time to lock into the contact points on the floor. So, the sliding Fig. 9.7 : A nail is fixed in the wall due to friction is slightly smaller than the static friction FRICTION 115 2024-25 the black board. Could it happen if there were no friction between the chalk and the board? If an object started moving, it would never stop if there were no friction. Had there been no friction between the tyres of the automobiles and the road, they could not be started or stopped or turned to change the direction of motion. You could not fix a nail on the wall (Fig. 9.7) or tie a knot. Without friction no building could be constructed. Fig.  9.9 : Rubbing of your palms makes you feel warm for a few minutes. You can cite various other examples in which friction Fig.  9.8 : Soles of shoes wear out due to friction On the other hand, friction is an evil, too. It wears out the materials whether they are screws, ball bearings or soles of shoes (Fig. 9.8). You must have seen worn-out steps of foot over-bridges at railway stations. Friction can also produce heat. Vigorously rub your palms together for Fig.  9.10 : Stricking a matchstick produces fire a few minutes (Fig. 9.9). How do you by friction feel? When you strike a matchstick produces heat. In fact, when a machine against the rough surface, it catches fire is operated, heat generated causes much (Fig. 9.10). wastage of energy. We shall discuss the You might have observed that the jar ways of minimising friction in the of a mixer becomes hot when it is run following section. 116 SCIENCE 2024-25 9.4 Increasing and Reducing In some situations, however, friction Friction is undesirable and we would want to minimise it. As you have seen in the previous section, Why do you sprinkle fine powder on friction is desirable in some situations. the carrom board (Fig. 9.12)? You might Have you ever thought why the sole have noticed that when a few drops of of your shoe is grooved [Fig. 9.11 (a)]? It oil are poured on the hinges of a door, is done to provide the shoes better grip the door moves smoothly. A bicycle and on the floor, so that you can move safely. a motor mechanic uses grease between Similarly, the treaded tyres of cars,trucks the moving parts of these machines. In and bulldozers provide better grip with all the above cases, we want to reduce the ground. Fig. 9.12 : Powder is sprinkled on the carrom board to reduce friction friction in order to increase efficiency. When oil, grease or graphite is applied between the moving part of a machine, a thin layer is formed there and moving (a) (b) surfaces do not directly rub against each Fig. 9.11 : (a) Soles of shoes and (b) tyres are other (Fig. 9.13). Interlocking of treaded to increase friction irregularities is avoided to a great extent. We deliberately increase friction by Movement becomes smooth. The using brake pads in the brake system substances which reduce friction are of bicycles and automobiles. When you called lubricants. In some machines, it are riding a bicycle, the brake pads do may not be advisable to use oil as not touch the wheels. But when you lubricant. An air cushion between the press the brake lever, these pads arrest moving parts is used to reduce friction. the motion of  the rim due to friction. Surface 2 The wheel stops moving. You might have seen that kabaddi players rub their Lubricant hands with soil for a better grip of their opponents. Gymnasts apply some coarse Surface 1 substance on their hands to increase friction for better grip. Fig. 9.13 : Action of lubricant FRICTION 117 2024-25 Activity 9.4 Take a few pencils which are Can we reduce friction to cylindrical in shape. Place them zero by polishing surfaces parallel to each other on a table. or using large amount of Place a thick book over it lubricants? (Fig. 9.15). Now push the book. You observe the pencils rolling as the book moves. Do you feel it easier to move the book in this way than to Friction can never be slide it? Do you think that entirely eleminated. No resistance to the motion of the book surface is perfectly smooth. has been reduced? Have you seen Some irregularities are heavy machinary being moved by always there. placing logs under it? 9.5 Wheels Reduce Friction You must have seen attaches and other pieces of luggage fitted with rollers. Even a child can pull such pieces of luggage (Fig. 9.14). Why is it so? Let us find out. Fig. 9.15 : Motion of the book on rollers When one body rolls over the surface of another body, the resistance to its motion is called rolling friction. Rolling reduces friction. It is always easier to roll than to slide a body over another. That is the reason it is convenient to pull luggage fitted with rollers. Can you now understand why the wheel is said to be one of the greatest inventions of mankind? Since the rolling friction is smaller than the sliding friction, sliding is replaced in most machines by rolling by the use of ball bearings. Common examples are the use of ball bearings between hubs and the axles of ceiling Fig. 9.14 : Rolling reduces friction fans and bicycles (Fig. 9.16). 118 SCIENCE 2024-25 is fluids. So we can say that fluids exert force of friction on objects in motion through them. The frictional force exerted by fluids is also called drag. The frictional force on an object in a fluid depends on its speed with respect to the fluid. The frictional force also depends on the shape of the object and the nature of the fluid. It is obvious that when objects move through fluids, they have to overcome friction acting on them. In this process they lose energy. Efforts are, therefore, made to minimise friction. So, objects are given special shapes. Where do you think scientists get hints for these special shapes? From nature, of course. Birds and fishes have to move about in fluids Fig. 9.16 : Ball bearings reduce friction all the time. Their bodies must have 9.6 Fluid Friction evolved to shapes which would make them lose less energy in overcoming You know that air is very light and thin. friction. Look carefully at the shape Yet it exerts frictional force on objects of an aeroplane (Fig. 9.17). Do you moving through it. Similarly, water and find any similarity in its shape and other liquids exert force of friction when that of a bird? In fact, all vehicles are objects move through them. In science, designed to have shapes which reduce the common name of gases and liquids fluid friction. Fig. 9.17 : Similarity in shapes of an aeroplane and a bird FRICTION 119 2024-25 KEYWORDS  WHAT YOU HAVE LEARNT BALL BEARING Ü Friction opposes the relative motion between two surfaces in contact. It acts on both the DRAG surfaces. FLUID FRICTION Ü Friction depends on the nature of surfaces in contact. FRICTION Ü For a given pair of surfaces friction depends upon the state of smoothness of those INTERLOCKING surfaces. LUBRICANTS Ü Friction depends on how hard the two surfaces press together. ROLLING FRICTION Ü Static friction comes into play when we try to move an object at rest. SLIDING FRICTION Ü Sliding friction comes into play when an STATIC FRICTION object is sliding over another. Ü Sliding friction is smaller than static friction. Ü Friction is important for many of our activities. Ü Friction can be increased by making a surface rough. Ü The sole of the shoes and the tyres of the vehicle are treaded to increase friction. Ü Friction is sometimes undesirable. Ü Friction can be reduced by using lubricants. Ü When one body rolls over another body, rolling A riddle for you friction comes into play. Rolling friction is In some situations, I oppose the motion smaller than sliding friction. in other situations, I facilitate the motion Ü In many machines, friction is reduced by but, I always oppose using ball bearings. the relative motion Ü Fluid friction can be minimised by giving between two moving surfaces. suitable shapes to bodies moving in fluids. Put some lubricant, and I become small there. Make the moving surfaces rough I make the movement tough. I may be— static, sliding or rolling but whenever two surfaces are in motion I am always there, Tell me who I am! 120 SCIENCE 2024-25 Exercises 1. Fill in the blanks. (a) Friction opposes the _____________  between the surfaces in contact with each other. (b) Friction depends on the  _____________ of surfaces. (c) Friction produces __________. (d) Sprinkling of powder on the carrom board ________ friction. (e) Sliding friction is ___________ than the static friction. 2. Four children were asked to arrange forces due to rolling, static and sliding frictions in a decreasing order. Their arrangements are given below. Choose the correct arrangement. (a) rolling, static, sliding (b) rolling, sliding, static (c) static, sliding, rolling (d) sliding, static, rolling 3. Alida runs her toy car on dry marble floor, wet marble floor, newspaper and towel spread on the floor. The force of friction acting on the car on different surfaces in increasing order will be (a) wet marble floor, dry marble floor, newspaper and towel. (b) newspaper, towel, dry marble floor, wet marble floor. (c) towel, newspaper, dry marble floor, wet marble floor. (d) wet marble floor, dry marble floor, towel, newspaper 4. Suppose your writing desk is tilted a little. A book kept on it starts sliding down. Show the direction of frictional force acting on it. 5. You spill a bucket of soapy water on a marble floor accidently. Would it make it easier or more difficult for you to walk on the floor? Why? 6. Explain why sportsmen use shoes with spikes. 7. Iqbal has to push a lighter box and Seema has to push a similar heavier box on the same floor. Who will have to apply a larger force and why? 8. Explain why sliding friction is less than static friction. 9. Give examples to show that friction is both a friend and a foe. 10. Explain why objects moving in fluids must have special shapes. FRICTION 121 2024-25 Extended Learning — Activities and Projects 1. What role does friction play in the sport of your choice? Collect some pictures of that sport in action where friction is either supporting it or opposing it. Display these pictures with proper captions on the bulletin board of your classroom. 2. Imagine that friction suddenly vanishes. How would life be affected. List ten such situations. 3. Visit a shop which sells sports shoes. Observe the soles of shoes meant for various sports. Describe your observations. 4. A toy to play with: Take an empty match box. Take out its tray. Cut a used refill of a ball pen of the same width as the tray as shown in the figure below. Fix the refill with two pins on the top of the tray as shown in Fig. 9.18. Make two holes on the opposite sides of the tray. Make sure that the holes are large enough to allow a thread to pass through them easily. Take a thread about a metre long and pass it through the holes as shown. Fix beads at the two ends of the thread so that it does not come out. Insert the tray in the outer cover of the matchbox. Suspend the match box by the thread. Leave the thread loose. The match box will start falling down due to gravity. Tighten the thread now and observe what happens. Explain your observation. Can you relate it to friction? Fig. 9.18 You can read more on the related topic on the following websites : l http://www.school-for-champions.com/science/friction.htm l http//hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/hbase/firct2.html 122 SCIENCE 2024-25